

--- PAGE 1 ---

DistB-VNET: Distributed Cluster-based Blockchain
Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks through SDN-NFV for
Smart City
Anichur Rahman∗, MD. Zunead Abedin Eidmum †, Dipanjali Kundu ‡, Mahir Hossain §,
MD Tanjum An Tashrif §, Md Ahsan Karim ¶, and Md. Jahidul Islam ∥
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Textile Engineering and Research (NITER) ,
Constituent Institute of Dhaka University, Savar, Dhaka-1350
Dept. of Internet of Things and Robotics Engineering, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Digital University ,
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Green University of Bangladesh
anis.mbstu.cse@gmail.com∗, 1801031@iot.bdu.ac.bd†, dkundu@niter.edu.bd‡, mahihossain114@gmail.com§,
mtashrif20@niter.edu.bd¶, makarim11@niter.edu.bd∥, jahid@cse.green.edu.bd∗∗
Abstract—In the developing topic of smart cities, Vehicular
Ad-Hoc Networks (V ANETs) are crucial for providing suc-
cessful interaction between vehicles and infrastructure. This
research proposes a distributed Blockchain-based Vehicular Ad-
hoc Network (“DistB-VNET”) architecture that includes binary
malicious traffic classification, Software Defined Networking
(SDN), and Network Function Virtualization (NFV) to ensure
safe, scalable, and reliable vehicular networks in smart cities.
The suggested framework is the decentralized blockchain for
safe data management and SDN-NFV for dynamic network
management and resource efficiency and a noble isolation forest
algorithm works as an IDS (Intrusion Detection System). Further,
“DistB-VNET” offers a dual-layer blockchain system, where
a distributed blockchain provides safe communication between
vehicles, while a centralized blockchain in the cloud is in
charge of data verification and storage. This improves security,
scalability, and adaptability, ensuring better traffic management,
data security, and privacy in V ANETs. Furthermore, the un-
supervised isolation forest model achieves a high accuracy of
99.23% for detecting malicious traffic. Additionally, reveals that
our method greatly improves network performance, offering
decreased latency, increased security, and reduced congestion,
an effective alternative for existing smart city infrastructures.
Keywords—Internet of Things, Blockchain, SDN, NFV , Ad-Hoc
Network, V ANET, Smart City.
I. I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, the field of SDN and NFV has made
significant advancements in the context of smart city systems.
Previous studies [1]–[3] have explored this field of technol-
ogy. With the increasing population, wireless connectivity
has advanced, and research in V ANETs has expanded, a
critical component of smart city wireless systems. V ANETs are
designed to enable communication between vehicles and their
operators to improve traffic safety and efficiency. V ANET, a
sub-category of the mobile ad hoc network, serves the function
of the transmission of data between the vehicle and the vehicle
operator.
In contrast to traditional V ANET technology, there is an
excellent opportunity for Blockchain that provides better se-
curity for the vehicle to the vehicle transmission system.
As in the conventional system, the data from the devices
are stored in a centralized server, and from this server, all
other nodes collect and use the information required [4]. This
centralized server may be the main attraction for hackers.
Because the information stored here is very critical for efficient
communication between the nodes of the transport system, this
information requires a secure platform where the data collected
is stored securely and the data preserved effectively. Again,
there is another emerging technology, Blockchain, which is
a distributed decentralized technology, and the information is
passed as a block. Here, only authorized block can take their
place in the chain, thus maintaining the privacy of the blocks
of information. The idea of a decentralized blockchain may,
therefore, be a potential solution for V ANET technology [5].
To effectively transfer information from one vehicle to another
by storing it in a trusted location, leveraging the design of the
Blockchain distributed process [6].
There are many critical issues that are still unsolved in
V ANETs, mainly in security, privacy, and time management.
Communication delays between vehicles could cause accidents
and hinder traffic management. Additionally, challenges like
the high power demands for node creation and block autho-
rization affect vehicular management systems [7]. Since cities
are evolving in a smart way, efficient traffic management has
become necessary, so improved accuracy, trust, transparency,
and security are required. Technologies like SDN, NFV , AI,
and Big Data can enhance performance, due to SDN offering
a layered platform to manage increasing data from vehicle-
to-vehicle communication [8]. However, centralized V ANET
architectures remain vulnerable due to centralized data stor-
age, making them vulnerable to hacking. Delays or system
failures could seriously impact traffic control. Despite efforts
to improve them, a fully secure and reliable solution is still
needed.
As smart cities evolve, there is a growing need for advanced
technologies that can handle complex urban systems more
efficiently. In this context, efficient traffic management plays
a pivotal role in ensuring safety and reducing congestion.
Our proposed system combines SDN, NFV , and Blockchain
to provide superior accuracy, trust, transparency, latency, and
security. SDN, with its layered architecture, offers an effective
platform to handle large volumes of data generated by vehic-
ular networks. However, the reliance on centralized servers
in SDN makes the system vulnerable to attacks. Integrat-
ing NFV helps mitigate these risks by decentralizing traffic
management, reducing power consumption, and enhancing
flexibility. In this system, NFV ensures that resources are
allocated more efficiently, improving overall performance [9].
The combination of SDN, NFV , and Blockchain could solve
the conventional problems in V ANET. However, there are still
arXiv:2412.04222v1  [cs.CR]  5 Dec 2024


--- PAGE 2 ---

some research gaps about how to successfully integrate these
technologies to find a better solution to the open challenges of
the smart vehicle management system. Before incorporating
SDN, the security challenges of SDN need to be mitigated.
Some of the attacks of SDN, namely Denial of Service attacks,
flooding attacks, and some others addressed by researchers
[10], [11]. At the same time, NFV is rather not free from
technical challenges [12]. Monitoring the flow of information,
failure recovery, especially in the telecommunication system,
and allocation of available resources are some of the significant
issues in NFV-related technologies [13].
This research introduces a novel approach to enhance tra-
ditional V ANET systems by integrating Blockchain with SDN
and NFV in smart city environments. Blockchain’s decen-
tralized structure ensures secure vehicular data transmission
while reducing the risk of central points of failure. In this
system, clusters of vehicles are formed, with a cluster head
communicating with distributed nodes linked to a central
cloud. While Blockchain enhances security, challenges like
high computational demands and delays need addressing.
By combining SDN and NFV , this approach optimizes both
security and performance in smart city V ANETs. This work’s
contributions are as follows:
• The authors propose a distributed Blockchain-based Ve-
hicular Ad-hoc Network “DistB-VNET” architecture that
provides security, scalability, reliability and confidential-
ity as well as better traffic management in the V ANET
environment .
• An SDN technique has been integrated with multiple
controllers from the data layer to the application layer
to divide the load equally between the devices and con-
trollers. Also, NFV is employed to ensure the automatic
allocation of network resources efficiently.
• Additionally, an unsupervised model Isolation Forest is
employed by the authors after the cluster head to detect
and block malicious traffic in the edge level.
Organization: The rest of the paper has been formed as
follows: We studied and discussed the related literature in
section II. Then, section III performs the proposed model for
smart cities. The result analysis and discussion are assessed
in section IV . In addition, section V presents the conclusion
with future directions.
II. R ELATED WORKS
Recently, researchers have addressed enormous work based
on emerging leading technologies such as SDN, distributed
Blockchain, NFV , and V ANET technologies. In this section,
the authors present an overview of some recent works in
literature.
Hemani et al. [14] proposed a tamper-proof and transparent
data sharing system between the nodes of autonomous ve-
hicles. The privacy of the shared information was preserved
using smart contracts with solidity. Zalte et al. [15] suggested
a integrating blockchain technology to solve problems with
data dispersion in V ANETs. In addition, this research covered
a blockchain that uses AI and data analytics. Diallo et al.
[16] proposed a new system for managing traffic-related data
in V ANETs (Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks) using blockchain
technology in their work. In their study, Abdullah et al. [17]
proposed a framework called Biometrics Blockchain (BBC)
to secure data sharing between vehicles in Vehicular Ad-hoc
Networks (V ANETs). The BBC framework used biometric
information to verify the identity of vehicles without revealing
their actual identity. Hailin et al. [18] explored the integration
of blockchain technology with Digital Twins (DTs) to map
real-world traffic scenarios into a virtual space in V ANETs
to enhance intelligent transportation and employ blockchain
for secure data storage and transmission in smart cities. The
proposed model demonstrated lower average delay times,
stable data message delivery rates, and high network security.
Additionally, with this traditional V ANET technology, other
emerging technologies like SDN, Blockchain, NFV , Artificial
Intelligence, Cloud computing, and so many other available
technologies were incorporated together to solve and enhance
the transportation management performance system. In their
research, SULEYMAN et al. [19] investigated how Blockchain
(BC) and SDN operate together in the context of the IoT [20].
The six main implementation objectives of security, computing
paradigms (fog and edge), trust management, access control
& authentication, privacy, and networking were used to cat-
egorize pertinent studies. Tahani et al. [21] in their article
proposed a decentralized Blockchain-based trust management
framework (BC-TMF) to compute trust metrics for vehicles
and achieved better accuracy for malicious vehicles. In their
study, Balaji et al. [22] discussed the difficulties with traffic
management and energy efficiency in V ANETs. In addition,
the authors presented the SDNTFP-C method, which combined
Deep Learning (DL) models with the scalability, flexibility,
and adaptability of SDN controllers.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF STATE-OF-ARTS
Works Contributions Research Gap
Hemani et al.(2024)
[14]
Implemented a smart contract with solid-
ity to reserve information privacy for A V
Excessive power consumption
Zalte et al. (2022)
[15]
Solved data dispersion problems in
V ANETs.
Computational power and Storage capac-
ity Limitation
SULEYMAN et al.
(2023) [19]
Combined Blockchain and SDN together
in the Context of IoT
Lack of regulatory frameworks and greater
complexity.
Tahani et al. (2022)
[21]
Computed trust metrics for vehicles and
acheived better accuracy
Privacy of vehicle owners is not protected
Balaji et al. (2023)
[22]
Integrated deep learning (DL) models with
the scalability, flexibility, and adaptability
of SDN controllers
Lack of robustness
In summary, the current research is not sufficient, and there
are still many challenges in this system. Table I shows the
contribution and the limitations of the previous studies, which
we are going to solve.
III. P ROPOSED “DIST BLOCK -VNET” A RCHITECTURE
FOR SMART CITIES
This section provides the architecture and operational
framework of “DistB-VNET”, a distributed blockchain-based
V ANET combined with SDN and NFV for smart cities. Fig. 1
shows the integration of vehicular cloud storage, blockchain,
and SDN controllers. Vehicular cloud storage remains as a
centralized repository for traffic data, vehicle IDs, and sensor
information, enhancing data sharing among vehicles and city
services. The blockchain network functions as a decentral-
ized ledger, providing data integrity by storing transactions
immutably. SDN offers a programmable network architecture,
dividing control and data planes for centralized network man-
agement. SDN controllers regulate data flow, routing, and
quality of service using northbound and southbound APIs.
Vehicles collect data by the sensors, upload it to vehicular
cloud storage for processing, and then send it to the blockchain
for validation. Network services, managed by NFV , handle the
validated data, while SDN controllers take real-time decisions


--- PAGE 3 ---

on routing, traffic management, and resource allocation. This
integration provides a secure, scalable, and efficient vehicular
communication network for smart cities context.
A. Detection and Block Malicious Traffic
In this architecture, IoT devices send traffic to the distributed
nodes through the cluster heads. However, it may be vulnerable
to cyber-attacks executed in the form of network traffic.
Traditional intrusion detection systems or supervised models
can only detect known types of cyber-attacks like DDoS, SQL
injection, etc. Moreover, in real-world scenarios, the attacks
may be new, as methods of cyber-attacks evolve daily. To
address this issue, instead of training a supervised model, we
train an unsupervised model. This unsupervised model, named
Isolation Forest, is trained on the IDS 2018 Intrusion dataset
[23]. The trained model functions as a primary verification
system between IoT edge devices and distributed nodes. The
Isolation Forest model checks all traffic, categorizing it as
either benign or malicious. Malicious traffic is blocked by the
verification process, and it is stored in temporary storage to
prevent it from passing until it is cleared of malware [24].
B. Architectural Design for VANET with SDN-NFV Procedure
In the context of smart cities, SDN emerges as a critical
technology by separating network control from data forward-
ing, thereby permitting dynamic traffic management. By using
SDN’s capabilities, traffic systems may adjust in real-time,
enhancing efficiency and responsiveness. Integrating SDN with
NFV further boosts system flexibility and scalability, enabling
optimal resource allocation and minimizing operational ex-
penses. The proposed architecture shown in Fig. 1 corresponds
with SDN and NFV standards, supporting dynamic network
management through components such as the SDN Network
Slice Manager (NSM), Network Slice Orchestrator (NSO), and
Vehicular Application Manager (V AM). In vehicle networking
situations like V ANET and the Internet of Vehicles (IoV),
SDN, NFV , and Fog Computing play significant roles in facili-
tating connection and optimal resource usage. Network slicing
provides for specialized networks with specified Quality of
Service (QoS) needs, while protocol selection, such as AODV ,
DSDV , or OLSR, depends on network characteristics and
mobility patterns. The integration of SDN and NFV offers
benefits such as flexibility, scalability, and cost reduction,
virtualizing network services to enable for effective resource
usage and dynamic allocation based on traffic conditions.
These components provide dynamic network management and
orchestration, providing optimal network performance and
dependable vehicular communication [25].
C. Proposed Algorithm for “DistB-VNET”
In this section, Alg. 1 is presented for our proposed Dis-
tributed Blockchain-based Vehicular Ad-hoc Network (DistB-
VNET), integrated with SDN and NFV technologies for
smart city environments. The algorithm is designed to han-
dle secure communication, vehicle clustering, and efficient
resource management in the network. The “DistB-VNET”
system first measures signal strengths and processing power
to make clusters via Roadside Units (RSUs) where cluster
heads lead communications. Messages are encrypted using
the public-private key pair and verified through blockchain
to ensure integrity. They have finally been forwarded by the
SDN controllers. Additionally, the controller manages traffic
and allocates resources automatically using NFV to optimize
performance and reduce latency.
Algorithm 1 DistB-VNET: Secure Communication and Clus-
tering Algorithm
1: Initialization:
V : Set of vehicles
C: Set of clusters
R: Set of Roadside Units (RSUs)
S: SDN controller
Kpub(v): Public Key of vehicle v
Kpriv(v): Private Key of vehicle v
B: Blockchain ledger
2: procedure CLUSTER FORMATION (V, R)
3: for each v ∈ V do
4: S(v), P(v) ▷ Measure signal strength and processing power
5: v → r ∈ R ▷ Broadcast to nearest RSU
6: CH ← Elect(R)
7: C ← Create Cluster(CH)
8: (KCpub, KCpriv ) ← KeyPair(C)
9: end for
10: end procedure
11: procedure SECURE COMMUNICATION (CH, S, B)
12: for each m from v to CH do
13: H(m) ← Hash(m)
14: E(m, Kpriv(v)) ▷ Encrypt with Kpriv
15: m ← D(E(m), Kpub(v)) ▷ Decrypt with Kpub
16: H(m), KCpriv → S
17: Validate(S, B)
18: end for
19: CH → S ▷ Forward data
20: end procedure
21: procedure RESOURCE ALLOCATION (S, NFV)
22: S ← Collect State Info and Traffic Load
23: Allocate(NFV ) ▷ Optimize latency and performance
24: Manage Traffic(S)
25: end procedure
D. Vehicles Controlling via Distributed Blockchain and SDN
The combination of blockchain, SDN-V ANET, IPFS and
clustering provides a secure and scalable solution for smart
city traffic management. Roadside Units (RSUs) transmit
cluster data through a blockchain-based voting system. That
safely selects the cluster head according to the vehicle type.
As seen in Fig 2, the cluster head then secures the com-
munication by creating cryptographic key pairs and signing
messages, which are subsequently confirmed by the SDN
controller via blockchain. By assembling vehicle requests
through cluster heads, who then hash and forward messages
to the SDN controller, clustering lowers networking load
[26]. The controller ensures a two-step verification process
and recives the original messages and contents from IPFS.
Blockchain ensures communication integrity within clusters
by using public key infrastructure for vehicle data verification.
Blockchain guarantees tamper resistance and transparency by
securing the storage of cluster keys, traffic data, and vehicle
data. SDN provides efficiant routing, resource management
and centralized network control. IPFS facilitates distributed
storage that guarantees scalability, While clustering improves
communication by reducing latency and congestion. Interac-
tion between RSU cluster members and SDN controllers is
secured by cryptographic key management and secure message
authentication. Guarantee the reliability and integrity of the
system.
E. Real Life Application of “DistB-VNET” Framework in
Smart Cities
Smart cities are regulated around huge volume of data
generated by smart vehicles, IoT devices, sensors, actuators
etc. As the concept of smart cities become popular, the
issues of data safety, security becomes top priority. Distributed
nature of blockchain ensures that all the data available is
stored in multiple places so that they are less vulnerable to
cyber attacks. For vehicular communication, it is important to
preserve the privacy of the vehicle owner while sharing vehicle


--- PAGE 4 ---

Fig. 1. Proposed “DistB-VNET” Architecture for Smart City
Fig. 2. Data Collection Scenario from the Edge Layers
information. This problem can be also solved by using the
smart contracts. To avoid collision and fast and reliable data
transfer, the latency should be minimal and throughput should
be maximum. “DistB-VNET” framework ensures the minimal
latency by using NFV automatic resource allocation process.
Finally, this framework ensures data privacy, safety and secure
communication of information for smart vehicles which make
it very much suitable for real life application in the smart
cities.
IV. R ESULT ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
V ANET is an important part of the smart city. Implementing
blockchain to secure the network connection between smart
vehicles in smart cities is a new addition, where the networking
process can be taken to the next level using the combination
of SDN-NFV with Edge and Fog computing. The persisting
previous work of researchers in the field of Smart cities,
Ad-Hoc networks, and blockchain inspired us to do this


--- PAGE 5 ---

work. We used two types of blockchain technology to secure
our network, distributed and centralized. Our smart vehicle
connects with the fog network which later connects with the
cloud server. The SDN technology is used to control the
network part and NFV is used to virtualize the process. The
result of our model is promising and excellent. This result
means that our proposed model can be used in modern smart
cities.
A. Measurement Parameters
We have used various parameters such as gas consumption
rate, throughput based on a number of vehicles, End- to-End
Delay, Packet Delivery Ratio, Overhead, and throughput based
on cluster size, to measure the performance of the proposed
framework.
Throughput in vehicular network, considering the cluster
size, is given by following equation where T(C) is the
throughput (in Mbps) based on cluster size, C is the size
of the cluster, D(C) is the average data generated by each
vehicle in the cluster, tb represents the delay due to blockchain
operations, ts is the time delay from SDN operations, tn
accounts for NFV-related delays such as resource allocation,
tc refers to the intra-cluster communication delay.
T(C) = C × D(C)
tb + ts + tn + tc
(1)
Moreover, throughput in a blockchain considering the num-
ber of vehicles, is given bellow where T(V ) is the throughput
(in Mbps) based on the number of vehicles where V represents
the total number of vehicles in the network, D(V ) is the
average data generated per vehicle, tb refers to the delay due
to blockchain operations, such as transaction validation and
block propagation, ts is the time delay from SDN operations,
including routing and traffic management, tn accounts for the
time delay due to NFV operations, tv is the communication
delay between vehicles and infrastructure..
T(V ) = V × D(V )
tb + ts + tn + tv
(2)
The gas consumption rate G(Tx) depends on the number of
transactions Tx and can be expressed as:
G(Tx) =G0 × Tx + Cb × Tx (3)
Where Tx denotes the total number of transactions processed
in the blockchain, G0 is the base gas cost required for validat-
ing a single transaction and Cb represents the additional gas
consumption due to the complexity of blockchain operations.
B. Environment Setup
We have used a network emulator named Mininet and
Ethereum for simulating our proposed methodology [28]. The
parameters used for this simulation are shown in Table III.
C. Performance Evaluation
Table IV indicates the performance scores for our isolation
forest algorithm. It achieves high accuracy of 99.23% follow-
ing by high precision of 99.14%, recall of 99.15% anf f-score
of 99.07%.
Fig. 3 illustrates the change in throughput due to the size
of the cluster size. Here, we consider two cluster sizes: size
of 5 and size of 10. The throughput increases as we increase
the cluster size of the proposed system. The gap between the
throughput of clusters 5 and 10 is quite big. On the other
hand for each cluster size, the throughput decreases for the
increase in the number of vehicle nodes. For cluster size 5
the highest throughput was for 15 number of vehicles and it
decreases with the increase number of vehicle and reach the
lowest point for 50 number of vehicles. On the other hand, the
throughput decreases for the limit of 25 vehicles for cluster
size 10 and after that it becomes saturated.
Fig. 3. Throughput of the proposed system in terms of different cluster size
Fig. 4 depicts the communication cost or the total number
of exchanged messages for the proposed system against the
total number of vehicles. Communication costs have always
increased due to the rise in the number of vehicles.
Fig. 4. Comparison of communication overhead
Table V exhibits the gas consumption with respect of the
number of transactions. Gas limit represents the maximum
possible required energy for a single transaction. For a small
amount of transactions, the gas limit is very low, but it
increases linearly for the increasing amount of transactions.
Table II shows the comparison of Throughput (THRPT),
Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), Network Lifetime (NLT), End-
to-End Delay (ETED), and Energy Consumption (ECM) be-


--- PAGE 6 ---

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF PROPOSED AND IEAOCGO-C [27] METHODS ACROSS VARIOUS METRICS
Vehicles NLT (rounds) PDR (%) THRPT (kbps) ETED (mJ) ECM (ms)
Proposed IEAOCGO-C Proposed IEAOCGO-C Proposed IEAOCGO-C Proposed IEAOCGO-C Proposed IEAOCGO-C
20 5200 4500 99.37 94.14 71.23 63.25 6.04 8.14 30.96 34.22
30 4900 4400 89.25 86.34 78.68 69.43 6.06 9.04 51.68 62.32
40 4700 3900 86.45 85.13 83.14 74.45 6.09 9.45 70.19 82.33
50 4200 3600 84.32 83.42 89.23 79.66 7.45 10.32 85.41 105.46
TABLE III
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT
Parameter Values
Blockchain Platform Ethereum
Emulator Mininet(version : 2.2.1)
Platform Type Decentralized
Environment Truffle, Ganache
Language Solidity
Number of Nodes 80
Max. of deceleration 5m/s2
Max. Acceleration 3.6 m/s2
Max. vehicle speed 50m/s2
Number of RSU Unit 10
Packet Size 100-512 bytes
Number of transactions Variable
Block size Variable
Transaction per Block Variable
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE METRICS OF ISOLATION FOREST
Accuracy (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1-Score (%)
99.23 99.14 99.15 99.07
TABLE V
GAS CONSUMPTION AGAINST NO . OF TRANSACTIONS
No. of transactions Gas Consumption (ETH)
5 27000
8 36000
10 41000
14 55000
17 66000
22 78000
26 89000
30 100000
tween our proposed model and IEAOCGO-C algorithm on
different vehicle numbers. Our proposed model outperform
the IEAOCGO-C [27] algorithm on every factor for different
vehicle numbers.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this research, we have proposed “DistB-VNET”, a novel
framework integrating ml based attack detection, Blockchain,
SDN, and NFV to ensure the scalability, security, and ef-
ficiency of vehicular communication in smart cities. First,
our model filters traffic and blocks malicious ones. Further,
our framework utilizes SDN to separate control and data
planes while ensuring dynamic resource allocation by NFV
and data integrity through an immutable ledger by Blockchain.
The results show improved throughput and communication
efficiency across different vehicle volumes and cluster sizes.
However, the system has not yet been tested in terms of
increased transmission costs and gas fees as vehicle numbers
and transactions grow. In future, we will focus on optimizing
resource management and reducing blockchain transaction
costs to improve system scalability.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. H. Ali, N. A. Sakr, N. El-Rashidy, and H. A. Ali, “A reliable position-
based routing scheme for controlling excessive data dissemination in
vehicular ad-hoc networks,” Computer Networks , vol. 229, p. 109785,
2023.
[2] A. Rahman, M. S. I. Khan, A. Montieri, M. J. Islam, M. R. Karim,
M. Hasan, D. Kundu, M. K. Nasir, and A. Pescap `e, “Blocksd-5gnet:
Enhancing security of 5g network through blockchain-sdn with ml-based
bandwidth prediction,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications
Technologies, vol. 35, no. 4, p. e4965, 2024.
[3] A. Rahman, M. A. H. Wadud, M. J. Islam, D. Kundu, T. A.-U.-H.
Bhuiyan, G. Muhammad, and Z. Ali, “Internet of medical things and
blockchain-enabled patient-centric agent through sdn for remote patient
monitoring in 5g network,” Scientific Reports , vol. 14, no. 1, p. 5297,
2024.
[4] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, S. S. Band, G. Muhammad, K. Hasan, and
P. Tiwari, “Towards a blockchain-sdn-based secure architecture for
cloud computing in smart industrial iot,” Digital Communications and
Networks, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 411–421, 2023.
[5] L. Mendiboure, M. A. Chalouf, and F. Krief, “Survey on blockchain-
based applications in internet of vehicles,” Computers & Electrical
Engineering, vol. 84, p. 106646, 2020.
[6] H. Fang, Y . Zhu, Y . Zhang, and X. Wang, “Decentralized edge collab-
oration for seamless handover authentication in zero-trust iov,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications , 2024.
[7] A. Hakiri, B. Sellami, and S. B. Yahia, “Joint energy efficiency and
network optimization for integrated blockchain-sdn-based internet of
things networks,” Future Generation Computer Systems , p. 107519,
2024.
[8] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, A. Montieri, M. K. Nasir, M. M. Reza, S. S.
Band, A. Pescape, M. Hasan, M. Sookhak, and A. Mosavi, “Smartblock-
sdn: An optimized blockchain-sdn framework for resource management
in iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 28 361–28 376, 2021.
[9] A. Rahman, C. Chakraborty, A. Anwar, M. R. Karim, M. J. Islam,
D. Kundu, Z. Rahman, and S. S. Band, “Sdn–iot empowered intelligent
framework for industry 4.0 applications during covid-19 pandemic,”
Cluster Computing, pp. 1–18, 2022.
[10] M. Arif, G. Wang, M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, T. Wang, and J. Chen, “A survey on
security attacks in vanets: Communication, applications and challenges,”
Vehicular Communications, vol. 19, p. 100179, 2019.
[11] J. Bhatia, Y . Modi, S. Tanwar, and M. Bhavsar, “Software defined
vehicular networks: A comprehensive review,” International Journal of
Communication Systems, vol. 32, no. 12, p. e4005, 2019.
[12] A. Bradai, M. H. Rehmani, I. Haque, M. Nogueira, and S. H. R. Bukhari,
“Software-defined networking (sdn) and network function virtualization
(nfv) for a hyperconnected world: Challenges, applications, and major
advancements.” J. Network Syst. Manage. , vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 433–435,
2020.
[13] S. R. Chowdhury, M. A. Salahuddin, N. Limam, and R. Boutaba, “Re-
architecting nfv ecosystem with microservices: State of the art and
research challenges,” IEEE Network, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 168–176, 2019.
[14] Hemani, D. Singh, and R. K. Dwivedi, “Designing blockchain based
secure autonomous vehicular internet of things (iot) architecture with
efficient smart contracts,” International Journal of Information Technol-
ogy, pp. 1–17, 2024.
[15] S. Zalte, V . Ghorpade, and R. K. Kamat, “Synergizing blockchain,
iot, and ai with vanet for intelligent transport solutions,” Emerging
Computing Paradigms: Principles, Advances and Applications, pp. 193–
210, 2022.
[16] E.-h. Diallo, O. Dib, and K. Al Agha, “A scalable blockchain-based
scheme for traffic-related data sharing in vanets,” Blockchain: Research
and Applications, vol. 3, no. 3, p. 100087, 2022.
[17] A. Alharthi, Q. Ni, and R. Jiang, “A privacy-preservation framework
based on biometrics blockchain (bbc) to prevent attacks in vanet,” Ieee
Access, vol. 9, pp. 87 299–87 309, 2021.
[18] H. Feng, D. Chen, and Z. Lv, “Blockchain in digital twins-based vehicle
management in vanets,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 19 613–19 623, 2022.
[19] S. W. Turner, M. Karakus, E. Guler, and S. Uludag, “A promising
integration of sdn and blockchain for iot networks: A survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 29 800–29 822, 2023.


--- PAGE 7 ---

[20] A. Rahman, K. Hasan, D. Kundu, M. J. Islam, T. Debnath, S. S.
Band, and N. Kumar, “On the icn-iot with federated learning integration
of communication: Concepts, security-privacy issues, applications, and
future perspectives,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 138, pp.
61–88, 2023.
[21] T. Gazdar, O. Alboqomi, and A. Munshi, “A decentralized blockchain-
based trust management framework for vehicular ad hoc networks,”
Smart Cities, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 348–363, 2022.
[22] T. Balaji and S. Srinivasan, “Networking controller based real time traffic
prediction in clustered vehicular adhoc networks,”Intelligent Automation
& Soft Computing , vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2189–2203, 2023.
[23] solarmainframe, “Ids intrusion csv dataset,” 2018, accessed: 2024-09-28.
[Online]. Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/solarmainframe/
ids-intrusion-csv/data
[24] A. Rahman, J. Islam, D. Kundu, R. Karim, Z. Rahman, S. S. Band,
M. Sookhak, P. Tiwari, and N. Kumar, “Impacts of blockchain in
software-defined internet of things ecosystem with network function
virtualization for smart applications: Present perspectives and future
directions,” International Journal of Communication Systems , p. e5429,
2023.
[25] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, Z. Rahman, M. M. Reza, A. Anwar, M. P.
Mahmud, M. K. Nasir, and R. M. Noor, “Distb-condo: Distributed
blockchain-based iot-sdn model for smart condominium,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 209 594–209 609, 2020.
[26] A. Rahman, M. J. Islam, M. S. I. Khan, S. Kabir, A. I. Pritom, and
M. R. Karim, “Block-sdotcloud: Enhancing security of cloud storage
through blockchain-based sdn in iot network,” in 2020 2nd International
Conference on Sustainable Technologies for Industry 4.0 (STI) . IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–6.
[27] M. Elhoseny, I. M. El-Hasnony, and Z. Tarek, “Intelligent energy aware
optimization protocol for vehicular adhoc networks,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 9019, 2023.
[28] M. J. Islam, A. Rahman, S. Kabir, M. R. Karim, U. K. Acharjee, M. K.
Nasir, S. S. Band, M. Sookhak, and S. Wu, “Blockchain-sdn-based
energy-aware and distributed secure architecture for iot in smart cities,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3850–3864, 2021.