

--- PAGE 1 ---

1 
 
T 
Challenges in Blockchain as a Solution for IoT 
Ecosystem’s Threats and Access Control: A Survey 
Suranjeet Chowdhury Avik, Sujit Biswas, Md Atiqur Rahaman Ahad , Zohaib Latif, Abdullah Alghamdi, Hamad 
Abosaq , Anupam Kumar Bairagi 
 
 
 
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) is increasingly influenc- 
ing and transforming various aspects of our daily lives. Contrary 
to popular belief, it raises security and privacy issues as it 
is used to collect data from consumers or automated systems. 
Numerous articles are published that discuss issues like cen - 
tralised control systems and potential alternatives like integration 
with blockchain. Although a few recent surveys focused on the 
challenges and solutions facing the IoT ecosystem, most of them 
did not concentrate on the threats, difficulties, or blockchain - 
based solutions. Additionally, none of them focused on blockchain 
and IoT integration challenges and attacks. In the context of 
the IoT ecosystem, overall security measures are very important 
to understand the overall challenges. This article summarises 
difficulties that have been outlined in numerous recent articles 
and articulates various attacks and security challenges in a 
variety of approaches, including blockchain -based solutions and 
so on. More clearly, this contribution consolidates threats, access 
control issues, and remedies in brief. In addition, this research 
has listed some attacks on public blockchain protocols with some 
real-life examples that can guide researchers in taking preventive 
measures for IoT use cases. Finally, a future research direction 
concludes the research gaps by analysing contemporary research 
contributions. 
Index Terms—Blockchain, e-government, Hyperledger Fabric, 
performance evaluation. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
HE Internet of Things (IoT) refers to electronic devices 
that have many built-in sensors and are connected to 
the Internet. IoT leverages a wide range of applications with 
integrated support of various communication technologies, 
protocols, sensor networks, proximity technologies, etc. [1]. 
According to IoT analytics, the enterprise IoT market grew
 
by 22.4% in 2021 to reach USD 157.9 billion [2]. Figure 1 
displays a bar graph showing the number of IoT devices that 
are worldwide connected from 2019 to 2023 along with pre - 
dictions for 2030[3]. Further, from 2019 to 2025, it provides an 
overview of consumer IoT (CIoT), which is primarily respon - 
sible for transporting data from the end user[4]. By 2030, there 
will be 9.7 billion more IoT devices in operation globally than 
there were in 2020, totaling more than 29 billion. This growth 
also has a huge impact on the world economy. IoT Analytics 
projects a 22.0% compound annual growth rate (CAGR) for 
the IoT market size between 2022 and 2027, bringing it to  
525 USD billion [5]. Application of these IoT devices directly 
influences end-users lives by facilitating the development 
of smarter home integration, innovating agriculture, building 
smarter cities, enhancing supply chain management, improving 
Corresponding Author: Sujit Biswas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Generic IoT and consumer IoT (2019 -25) usage statistics and  
prediction 
 
 
health care [6], consolidating internet -linked manufacturing 
facilities, reshaping hospitality, etc. For example, in smart 
home lighting, gardening, security, air quality, water quality, 
voice assistants, switches, locks, electricity, water meters, and 
many more private communications [7]. Animal tracking, 
known as ”Intelia” in the agricultural industry, is used for 
precision agriculture and farming. The convenience of city 
life, as well as urban security and safety. Another important 
application is e -healthcare, in which patients are remotely 
monitored, the elderly are cared for remotely, and so on [8]. 
 
A. IoT ecosystem challenges 
Most IoT -leveraged smart systems are controlled from a 
centralised server which stored the most important information 
in a centralised location. The information includes industrial 
production, personal information, and very private information 
about the users, depending on the use cases. Data leakage from 
IoT or centralised control systems ultimately discloses the end- 
user information or company is secret [9]. Existing data can 
also be contaminated in the same way. The effects of security 
risks in the context of the IoT can be far more severe than the 
dangers themselves. This is especially clear in the area of the 
IIoT, where attacks in the past have caused effects to spread. 
The use of IoT devices in healthcare for remote monitoring of 
vital signs has already proven useful during the epidemic [10]. 
As such, attacks on such devices might compromise patients’ 
privacy and possibly put their lives in peril. 
Security and privacy standards must be enforced to prevent 
any system vulnerabilities or dangers because of the rapid 
expansion of the IoT [11]. Reliability, scalability, and power 
consumption are all essential considerations when it comes to 
30 
 
25 IoT  CIoT 
20 
 
15 
 
10 
 
5 
 
0 
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 
Year 
Number of connected devices 
(in billions) 

--- PAGE 2 ---

2 
 
the industrial IoT (IIoT) [12] [13]. As a result, typical security 
measures may not always work. Also crucial in an IIoT context 
is one or more of these assaults. In an IIoT setting, certain IoT- 
related attacks can have much more destructive consequences. 
Layered-based attacks on IoT devices are increasing day by 
day. In order to fix these device -level security problems, the 
industry has already come up with a lot of security concerns. 
Many mitigation techniques have already been implemented  
in the past. Blockchain- based security methods, however, are 
excellent for protecting the Internet of Things. 
Since blockchain makes IoT secure and decentralised, it is  
a good solution for the aforementioned issues. A blockchain  
is essentially a series of blocks, each of which is timestamped 
and connected to the others by cryptographic hashes[14]. It 
functions as a kind of decentralised ledger, with its data 
being shared among a network of users. Furthermore, IoT 
is a promising field in which many smart applications are 
being created. IoT applications use sensors, smart objects, and 
actuators. Many people are interested in studying the usage 
of blockchain technology in various industries because of its 
transparency and integrity qualities, which cannot be changed 
retrospectively without altering all the following blocks. To 
support seamless sign -on, blockchain can be used to securely 
track and manage digital identities. Digital signatures based  
on public -key cryptography serve as the foundation for most 
blockchain-based authentication solutions. Each transaction 
must be signed by an authorised private key in order to 
identify a user’s identity on a blockchain. There are many  
uses of blockchain in the IIoT, but there are also many 
ongoing obstacles to overcome. To eliminate the requirement 
for a trusted third party intermediary, blockchain technology  
is one example[15]. While the potential of this technology is 
undeniable, several obstacles must be overcome before it can 
be employed in a meaningful way. When using blockchain 
technology to an IIoT application,it is important to take into 
account a broader set of concerns throughout the solution’s 
design phase[16]. 
 
B. Blockchain in IoT eco-system 
Security and privacy must be maintained to prevent system 
vulnerabilities and threats brought on by the expanding IoT 
[11]. When it comes to the IIoT, reliability, scalability, and 
power consumption are all crucial factors to take into account. 
Therefore, standard security measures might not always be 
effective. One or more of these challenges are also essential  
in the context of the IIoT [12]. Certain IoT-related attacks may 
have far greater detrimental effects in an IIoT environment. 
As blockchain is secure and decentralised, it can be an 
excellent solution to the issues[17]. Blockchain is essentially a 
collection of timestamped blocks connected by cryptographic 
hashes [14]. It functions as a decentralised ledger, with its  
data being shared among a network of users. Every trans - 
action is recorded in immutable blockchain consiquently the 
blocks are added into ledgers which is also a breakable 
chain. Immutability in the context of IoT systems can stop  
data manipulation. Blockchain technology (BCT) has made it 
possible to handle distributed transactions, the building blocks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Blockchain contributions published from 2017-22 in IEEE and Elsevier 
(Science Direct) 
 
 
of the IoT ecosystem, in a creative and exciting way [18]. The 
core security mechanism of BCT, which was initially used 
to defend a single consortium as a coin, is currently utilised 
in both public and private applications. The elimination of 
centralization and the automated management of a secure flow 
of real -time data across IoT devices are also primary drivers 
for Blockchain’s acceptance in the IoT. People can control who 
sees their data and under what conditions thanks to Blockchain 
technology. Because the public ledger can be traced back to 
the point at which changes or data tampering were necessary to 
commit a new block, the Blockchain can be an excellent source 
of trustworthy traces and artefacts. However, Blockchain has 
its limitations, much like any emerging technologies, and using 
it in crucial IoT networks is a very risky proposition. For 
instance, there are still many unanswered problems regarding 
the use of IoT sensors to supply chain management and the 
state of data security in the healthcare industry. 
 
C. Current status 
We combed through publications from the most prestigious 
academic journals and publishers like IEEE and Elsevier to  
get a sense of Blockchain and IoT’s overall impact in the 
academic world. As shown in Figure 2, there were 24500 
related articles on Blockchain published in IEEE and Elsevier 
only from 2017 to 2022. This huge number of articles proves 
the importance of these technologies in various applications. 
The majority of these contributions recommend BCT for IoT 
system security while they taking a lot of fine -grained aspects 
into account, including thinking about security, including data 
security, authentication, multi- user access, and so on. For 
example, Sookhak et al. [19] summarise blockchain-based IoT 
access control for healthcare systems. It describes different 
types of key-based encryption for healthcare security. Ghaffari 
et al. [20] discuss access control for integration in business 
databases. It claims that blockchain and other distributed 
ledger technologies are having an effect on how businesses 
operate today. Bagga et al. [21] summarise device- to-device 
access management using blockchain technology. Pal et al. 
[22] discuss access control mechanisms in the IoT that are de - 
veloped on three commonly used access control mechanisms: 
8000 
 
7000 
 
6000 IEEE Elsevier 
5000 
 
4000 
 
3000 
 
2000 
 
1000 
 
0 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
Year 
No of Publications 

--- PAGE 3 ---

3 
 
role-based access control (RBAC); attribute-based access con- 
trol (ABAC); and capability -based access control (CapBAC). 
Shakarami et al. [23] discuss the blockchain- based adminis - 
tration of access in smart home IoT. Smart contract security 
and device-cloud communication are discussed. Sekaran et al. 
[24] discusses IoT automation through mobile edge computing 
provided by 6G and the blockchain. Traditional areas of 
interest for a range of purposes were represented, such as  
intelligent manufacturing, supply chain management, the food 
sector, the intelligent grid, healthcare, media and digital rights 
administration, agriculture, the internet of automobiles, and 
unmanned aerial vehicles. Abubakar et al. [25] briefly describe 
the process of creating a distributed system of authentication 
and access control for medical data acquired by wearable 
sensors. In [26], authors discussed the growth of decentralised 
end-to-end manufacturing applications. Smart contracts are 
agreements between people who want to use a service and 
the people who make the service (DApps) on demand. They 
built a decentralised system in which the nodes checked and 
monitored each other. This makes for a safe marketplace where 
data resources can be traded. More details are covered in 
related work sections. However, in earlier reviews, the authors 
only addressed one site, either through threat detection [27], 
access control [28], new decentralisation techniques [29], or 
architectural limitations[30]. They particularly focused on a 
particular aspect of access control and other blockchain -based 
strategies for thwarting threats. On the other hand, we have 
taken into account every area of security, including the threats 
that exist in IoT ecosystems, the difficulties these threats pro - 
vide, and potential solutions. We concluded from our literature 
review that access control systems can address the majority of 
security concerns. We have therefore focused on access control 
problems and blockchain -based solutions. Additionally, we 
have outlined current blockchain concerns and the state -of- 
the-art in recent cyber -hacking, with justifications. A study
 
on attacks on blockchain will guide researchers to improve  
IoT security because of the breadth and expressiveness of 
the information regarding those threat mitigation approaches. 
This article groups the key security concerns of the IoT and 
dig into the research gap required to focus on making this 
domain more conducive to overcoming real -life problems. In 
sharp contrast to the survey articles found in the literature, this 
research contributes: 
• A list of issues with details categories that may result 
from different attacks on IoT systems. 
• A high-level overview of access control problems and 
typical issues. 
• A collection of illustrative blockchain-based solutions 
that have recently been offered in articles. 
• A list of probable attacks on blockchain systems along 
with historical illustrations. 
• A useful research direction based on our study. 
The rest of the paper is organised into another six sec - 
tions. Section II describes the previous related reviews and 
introduces the reason for this review. IoT system threats have 
been presented in Section III. We have categorised various 
threats in this section. Access control challenges arise due to 
various threats and their solutions as well as blockchain- based 
remedies have been discussed in Section IV -B. A historical 
attack on the blockchain protocol with technical details has 
been presented in Section V. Finally, we have presented a  
brief summary of future research directions and concluded the 
overall contribution in Section VI and VII respectively. 
 
II. RELATED WORK 
As IoT devices carry consumer information, this raises 
security and privacy concerns, especially for end-users’ private 
information. Moreover, when the devices are used in smart 
industries, it also raises some issues. Because of resource 
constraints, adopted technology is vulnerable. Malicious cam - 
paigns that flood targets with millions of requests are called 
DDoS assaults, and they can affect a large number of IoT 
devices. As there are currently no authentication standards for 
IoT devices, they pose a risk to vital infrastructure [31]. The 
constant connectivity of IoT devices also leaves them open 
to cyber threats. Overall, IoT applications need to be scalable 
and reliable. Blockchain technology can make sure that the 
device’s readings are correct and prevent bad information  
from getting out. Blockchain not only provides data security 
but also allows for individual devices to be tracked and 
recognised. This is a must if you want to keep devices that 
connect to the internet safe. Considering the cyber -security 
properties of blockchain, a huge number of researchers suggest 
using blockchain to overcome security and privacy issues in 
the IoT ecosystem which has been reflected in Figure 2. 
To understand the current implementation state of BCT and 
IoT system integration, we have searched through 3798 of 
connected research publications using advance searches and 
related keywords. A thematic graphic that highlights the value 
of BCT and IoT integration may be found in Figure 3. After 
multiple rounds of filtering and removing duplicates, we finally 
worked with 3695 articles after screening a small number of 
publications based on titles and abstracts. Finally, we assessed 
195 articles are considered in this our review process beyond 
some various online sources (e.g., white papers, blogs, etc). 
Moreover, we have screened this section summarises a few 
of the review papers that conclude the existing contributions  
to overcoming the IoT ecosystem challenges. The number of 
prior review articles from 2017 –2022, published in IEEE and 
Elsevier, is shown in 4. This contribution differs greatly from 
state-of-the-art contributions, even if they are connected in 
a broader context and touch on themes like access control, 
Blockchain integration with the IoT, and Blockchain. Finally, 
the main points of departure from previous appraisals have 
been discussed. 
Mohanta et al. [32] discussed Artificial Intelligence (AI)  
and Blockchain integration with IoT, where they focused on 
private key encryption, an important idea that could be used  
in many places, like the medical field, the IoT, manufacturing, 
and supply chain management, all of which are also talked 
about in the context of AI -IoT integration. How blockchain 
can ensure IoT devices’ security, especially IoT-generated data 
security, has been well analysed in almost every application 
domain. The number of review articles well summarises those 

--- PAGE 4 ---

4 
 
Records Identified Thorough 
database searching (n= 3798) 
Records after duplicates removed (n=3695) 
Records screened (n=3695) 
Records excluded (n= 2404 based 
on title and n= 878 based on 
abstracts) 
Full-text articles excluded with 
reason (n=231) 
Studies included in Systematic 
review (n=182) 
Screening Eligibility Included Identification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Brief but comprehensive summary of the research’s methodology and  
papers selection processes; main findings and conclusions drawn from the  
meta-analysis and synthesis 
 
 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
Year 
 
 
Fig. 4. Recent review articles somehow related to blockchain 
 
 
research contributions from various points of view. For exam - 
ple, the effects of having a lot of IoT devices, slow computers, 
and designs of the Blockchain of Things (BCoT) are discussed 
in [36]. Uddin et al. [37] Although in a broader context those 
review articles are related and touch on topics including access 
control, Blockchain integration with the internet of things, and 
Blockchain, this contribution is significantly different from 
state-of-the-art contributions. Finally, we have mentioned the 
key differences between this contribution and existing reviews. 
By using Blockchain technology, healthcare can be changed 
and improved in ways like interoperability, which means that 
patients can get access to their medical records and medicines, 
and hospital assets can be tracked safely throughout their entire 
life cycle. 
As blockchain is a well- known cybersecurity technology, a 
large number of contributions have recommended blockchain 
as a cyber -security tool such as access control, transaction 
security, etc. in the IoT. For example, Feng et al. [42] discussed 
access control methods for different verification circumstances 
such as cryptographic security, distributed access control, syn- 
chronised databases, etc. Namane et. al. [48] IoT applications 
are also used to categorise recent Blockchain -based access 
control frameworks. It is feasible to pinpoint the results of each 
domain by analysing these efforts according to the domain of 
application. Similarly, by using a local private blockchain, a 
lightweight security mechanism can be implemented to satisfy 
IoT needs, as discussed in [49]. Without relying on third 
parties, secure communication with many entities is ensured 
through multiple -chain code- based access control (TTP). In 
addition, Da et al. [47] discussed the access control -related 
contributions where device-level authentication was privileged. 
It has been talked about how Blockchain, which is a platform 
for a distributed and transparent database, could improve 
IoT security for public services. The Ethereum blockchain, 
data management, and authentication techniques discussed by 
Panarello et al., in [39]. Device manipulation and how it affects 
data management as a solution for an open market are also 
talked about. Key management is solved by securely distribut- 
ing the secret key using the elliptic curve Diffie -Hellman key 
exchange protocol. Besides, Han et al. [51] considered the Intel 
SGX Enclave security zone for processing sensitive data in 
not enough bandwidth, and bad radio connections on how  
well blockchain works were looked at. Numerous DAG and 
GHOST protocol use cases are also discussed for securing 
the communication data in [33]. Again, Memon et al. [34] 
discuss hybrid- IoT as a three -tiered architecture: fog, edge, 
and cloud. Hybrid IoT uses three different communication 
architectures that work well for different use cases. Hybrid  
IoT gets around the problems with both existing infrastructures 
(e.g., cloud -based IoT and Blockchain- based IoT) and meets 
the standards expected of future IoT. Gao et al. [35] analysed 
Blockchain technology from the vantage points of the data 
layer, the network layer, and the application layer, paying 
special attention to the activities or implementations of each. 
The author evaluated the literature on a wide range of use cases 
and found that Blockchain’s permanent record is well suited  
to the decentralised architectures of the IoT, the cloud, and 
even the edge computing environments known as fog and edge 
computing. Furthermore, composite layered access control 
methods based on Blockchain, as well as the opportunities 
edge node data processing and transmission. Similarly, Al et al. 
discuss a layered threat mitigation approach based on cloudlets 
and blockchain in their [46]. They talked about things like 
making sure that data is stored and processed in a decentralised 
way, addressing worries about the safety of anonymity, and 
making sure that the steps needed for effective authentication 
in public services are clear. Comparisons of various solutions 
in the fields of cryptography, consensus mechanisms, network 
security, and application -level security for the P2P business 
model are discussed in [43]. Likewise, compare the security  
of Blockchain to that of a traditional cyber network and 
examine both in light of numerous cyber-attack use cases 
in [38]. Blockchain -based threat mitigation techniques and 
methods are covered in Salimitari et al. [41] where they 
covered the drawbacks of some blockchain protocols such 
as Hyperledger Fabric, Sawtooth, IoTA, and Ethereum. They 
focused on better options for IoT networks and applications in 
terms of throughput, latency, computational overhead, network 
overhead, scalability, and privacy. 
AAddddiittiioonnaall rreeccoorrddss iiddeennttiiffiieedd 
ththrorouugghhootthheerr ssoouurrcceess ((nn==110033) ) 
Number of full-text articles 
assessed for eligibility (n=413) 
Nuamssbeesr soef dfuflol-rteexltigaibritliictyles 
(n=413) 
Studies included in Systematic 
review (n=195) 
Full-text articles excluded with 
reason (n=218) 
 
Records screened (n=3695) 
Records excluded (n= 2404 
based on title and n= 878 
based on abstracts) 
Records after duplicates removed 
(n=3695) 
Records Identified Thorough 
database searching (n= 3798) 
Elsevier  IEEE 
Included Eligibility Screening Identification 
No of Survey Papers 

--- PAGE 5 ---

5 
 
Physical Attacks Management 
Attack 
Network 
Attack 
Threats in 
IoT 
Data 
Attack 
Logical Attack 
• Virus, Worms,  Trojan 
Horses,  Spyware  & Adware  
• Malware 
• SQL Injection  Attack 
• Phishing Attack 
• Poisoning Attack 
• Data Inconsistency 
• Unauthorized Access 
• Data Breach 
• Traffic Analysis Attack 
• RFID Spoofing 
• Routing Information Attack 
• Selective Forwarding 
• Sinkhole Attack 
• Sybil Attack 
• MiTM 
• DoS 
• DDoS 
• Access Control 
• Authentication 
• Authorization 
• Confidentiality 
• DoS Attack 
• Data Leakage 
• Data Transit  & Attack 
• Impersonation 
• Node Tampering 
• Non-Repudiation 
• Routing  Attack 
• Verification 
• Malicious Code Injection 
• RF Interference/Jamming 
• Fake Node Injection 
• Sleep Denial Attack 
• Side Channel  Attack 
• PDoS 
TABLE I 
SUMMARY OF RECENT RELATED CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
Paper Published Access Control Security Threats Blockchain Comments 
[38] 2018 X  X Cloud Security. 
[35] 2018 X  X Cloud security. 
[39] 2018  X X Smart manufacturing. 
[40] 2018 X   Gervais technique. 
[41] 2019 X   Consensus protocol. 
[42] 2019   X Privacy preservation. 
[33] 2019  X  GHOST protocol. 
[43] 2019  X X TCP/IP four-layer Authentication. 
[32] 2019 X  X Intelligent transportation system. 
[36] 2020  X X Smart home application. 
[44] 2020  X  Open and distributed ledger. 
[34] 2020 X X  Distributed consensus algorithms. 
[45] 2020   X Anti-counterfeiting Systems. 
[46] 2021 X  X Cloudlet computing. 
[47] 2021  X X Cloudlet-dew architecture. 
[37] 2021  X X Access control mechanism. 
[48] 2022 X X  Eliminating Trusted Third Party (TTP). 
[49] 2022 X X  Multiple layers for privacy protection. 
[50] 2022  X X IoT in healthcare. 
[51] 2022 X   Software guard extensions (SGX). 
This Pa- 
per 
2023    IoT ecosystem’s threats, security challenges, so- 
lutions, attacks on blockchain 
 
The most recent relevant articles are included in Table I 
along with their major contributions. We reviewed most of the 
previous related contributions that addressed issues with the 
IoT ecosystem and blockchain- based solutions. Each review 
paper skillfully organised the most recent contributions, which 
individually span AI, computing, communication, access con-  
trol, and frameworks. Contrary to popular belief, the purpose 
of this review is to investigate the recent contributions that are 
focused on threats to the IoT ecosystem, mitigation challenges 
and solutions, and how blockchain can help overcome these 
challenges. We have broadly investigated various types of 
access control to ensure end -user security. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first review that covers every aspect of 
IoT ecosystem security, from potential threats to solutions. 
 
III. SECURITY THREATS IN IOT SYSTEMS 
One of the most popular ways to steal data is by altering 
the firmware of an IoT device or, in some other manner, 
regulating the transactions that the IoT creates. This frequently 
leads to IoT security problems. Access to financial or personal 
information is regularly sought in this way. We classified every 
possible attack into five categories based on the vulnerable 
zone or targeted area. These include physical attacks, attacks 
on communications or networks, attacks on software or logic, 
attacks on data, and attacks involving management. Figure 5 
illustrates the potential attacks in every category that have been 
mentioned in various academic articles. A brief summary of 
previous relevant contributions is also summarised in the Table 
II. 
 
A. Physical attacks 
Gadgets are commonly unlocked and accessible to numer - 
ous individuals. Lack of physical security puts the IoT ecosys- 
tem in danger. An attacker is close enough to a target network 
or system in a physical attack. For example, malicious Code 
can be injected by an attacker that can repeatedly perform 
various attacks [52]. Instead of code injection, sometimes 
intruders try to control or inject a managed node in the 
overall ecosystem which is used to manipulate data flow 
among legal nodes in the network [53]. Besides data theft or 
controlling the network, interruption in communication flow  
is another common type of physical attack. For example,  
radio RF interference or jamming is a well- known attack in 
wireless sensor networks because of the DoS attack on RFID 
tags/sensor nodes [54]. It can stop the overall communication 
system in the WSN (e.g., vehicular network). In addition due 
to permanent denial of service (PDoS) IoT devices can be 
sabotaged and rendered inoperable by plashing, a type of DoS 
attack. To carry out the attack, a virus is used to delete the 
kernel or upload a corrupt BIOS [55]. BySide Channel attack 
an attackers can obtain encryption keys by exploiting flaws in 
the system’s hardware, such as timing, power, and other errors 
[56]. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Every possible attack in various broader attack categories in the IoT  
ecosystem 
 
 
B. Network attacks 
Network attacks are unauthorised intrusions into a com- 
pany’s computer network or its associated digital resources. 

--- PAGE 6 ---

6 
 
Hackers target networks in order to alter, delete, or steal 
sensitive information. Perimeters are a common target for 
hackers seeking entry into a network. IoT network systems  
can be manipulated to cause harm through network assaults.  
It can be close to a network to get started. As most IoT devices 
are resource-constrained and don’t have strong authentication 
mechanisms, intruders use communication mediums to eaves - 
drop on the system. For example, RFID Spoofing where an 
RFID signal is spouted by the attacker to obtain access to the 
data on the RFID tag. Hackers can then use the source tag ID 
to transmit data that appears to be real [57]. Due to routing 
information attacks, routing information is altered and causes 
problems in generating routing loops, issuing error messages, 
or causing traffic to be routed in the wrong direction [58]. 
Similarly, an attacker can get network information by Traffic 
Analysis attack even if they are not physically adjacent to the 
network by eavesdropping on the communications between 
devices [59]. Losing control of the network can allow selective 
forwarding attack in which the rogue node might change, drop, 
or deliberately forward some messages to other nodes in the 
network. Because of this, the information that reaches its final 
destination is insufficiently [60]. 
Bandwidth stability is very important for active connectivity. 
Lower bandwidth can generate Wormhole Attack which can 
compromise tunnel packets between two points [61]. For any 
reason, a malicious node can occur, resulting Sybil Attack 
which is introduced as Sybil nodes can change their iden-  
tities and travel throughout the network, resulting in serious 
resource misuse [62]. In an IoT environment, malicious people 
who can assume many identities and operate a distributed 
network can take control of the governing network. One of  
the most common and well -known attacks in communication 
technology, especially wireless communication, is Man-in-the- 
Middle Attack (MiTM) which allows an attacker to listen in  
on or watch how two IoT devices talk to each other to get to 
their private data. Wearable IoT devices are controlled through 
smartphone applications that can cause MiTM to compromise 
application permissions [63], [64]. 
Although information theft is the main goal of most attacks, 
the most perilous type is the Denial-of-Service (DoS) Attack, 
which renders a system or network completely inoperable[65]. 
This is because a denial of service attack might overwhelm the 
target with traffic or supply data that causes it to fail. When  
the server or other Internet of Things devices are inaccessible 
due to a denial of service attack, the entire network is at 
danger. In addition, in Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 
Attacks, several systems coordinate to flood a single host with 
malicious data. For example, an adaptable IoT system can be 
targeted for control by a group of users [66]. 
 
C. Logical attacks 
Logical attacks aim to interrupt the logical flow of a 
device’s actions, which can be accomplished in one of two 
ways: either by physically getting access to the device in 
question and then launching an attack on it, or by leveraging 
services and trafficking hacks. Attacks against an IoT system’s 
software or security weaknesses can be classified as software 
attacks or logical attacks[67]. An attacker can get access to 
sensitive information, steal data, or launch a DoS attack by 
infecting a system with a virus, worm, Trojan horse, spyware, 
or adware[68]. Malware on IoT devices may theoretically 
propagate to cloud services and data centres. It’s also possible 
for malware to attack IoT devices and then spread to other 
cloud services or data centres[68]. 
Often attackers employ SQL injection to exploit network 
flaws and obtain access to database administration. SQL 
injection occurs when a hacker intentionally enters malicious 
code into a web  form in  order to  steal sensitive  data. [69]. 
The database or website will execute the malicious commands 
and give the attacker access to the data they requested if it 
is not properly protected. In IoT system, Phishing is very 
common attack due to lack of technical consciousness and 
carefulness of end -users. It is an online social engineering 
technique intended to deceive users into divulging sensitive 
information or downloading malware -spreading applications. 
Emails containing harmful attachments or links to fraudulent 
websites are the most typical method of phishing attack [70]. 
Again, domain names are converted into IP addresses via the 
DNS, or domain name system. An attacker must first get 
access to one of the DNS servers in order to modify a specific 
domain’s or website’s IP address so that users trying to access 
it will be redirected [71]. DNS Poisoning is the process by 
which an attacker creates a fake DNS server response and 
delivers it to a DNS server to tamper with data that was already 
cached there. 
 
D. Data attacks 
As the IoT develops, more and more cloud storage is being 
put to use. With cloud computing, it’s simple to deploy virtual 
servers, start databases, and construct data pipelines for IoT 
applications[72]. The cloud can aid in improving data security 
by providing suitable authentication mechanisms, firmware 
and software update systems, etc. In this section [73], we look 
at the most typical forms of data theft in the IoT. A data breach 
or memory leak is the unauthorised disclosure of personal, sen- 
sitive, or confidential information[74]. A ”Data Inconsistency” 
occurs whenever there is a discrepancy between the data in 
motion and the data stored in a centralised database as a result 
of a data integrity attack[75]. In addition, access control refers 
to the steps taken to allow only approved users access and 
deny access to unauthorised users[76]. Unauthorised access 
gives bad actors a chance to steal private information or claim 
ownership of data. 
 
E. Management attacks 
The growing use of IoT devices is changing the land- 
scape of the enterprise network. The IoT has the potential 
to greatly enhance operational transparency and productivity. 
Networking these IoT devices allows for streamlined and 
centralised management across all locations. But, there are 
serious security concerns for everyone involved when it comes 
to IoT devices. A compromised IoT device can be exploited by 
a hacker for network lateral movement or as a bot in bigger 

--- PAGE 7 ---

7 
 
TABLE II 
A SUMMARY OF CONTRIBUTIONS CONSIDERED VARIOUS ATTACKS 
 
2*Paper Attack types 
Physical Network Logical Data Management 
[77]    X X 
[78] X  X X  
[79] X   X X 
[80] X X X   
[81] X X   X 
[82]  X X X  
[83]  X  X  
[84] X X X   
[85] X   X  
[86] X   X X 
This paper X     
 
 
malware campaigns to launch different attacks on internet - 
connected devices. With the high number of diverse low -end 
devices linked and transferring and processing real -time data, 
the IoT poses enormous issues in terms of access control [87]. 
Distributed design, an adhoc networking model, and many sen- 
sors all contribute to bandwidth issues between IoT devices. 
Authentication methods now in use include passwords, smart 
cards, and fingerprints, although none of these methods operate 
on low -end devices. Nodes in an IoT application must be 
authorised to ensure safe data access or transmission [88]. Data 
must be authorised by a centralised authority or decentralised 
network before it can be exchanged between devices [89].  
The network must be given permission before any data can 
be processed. In a decentralised IoT design, determining how 
to authenticate each node in the network is a major difficulty. 
Again, Fog nodes, or edge nodes, are utilised to process real - 
time data in an IoT network since they have large numbers of 
sensors [90]. 
Maintaining the privacy of each node is essential. If the 
nodes are not secure, important data could be hacked. DoS 
attacks can take advantage of the CIA Triads’ vulnerability 
in the ”availability” area, rendering the server inaccessible 
to its users[91]. By flooding the server with requests, the 
attacker hopes to steal data and slow down the connection. 
Data leakage is the unintentional disclosure of confidential 
information, either electronically or physically, outside of a 
company[92]. Intellectual property, medical records, confi - 
dential information, consumer data, etc. are all examples of  
the types of information that might be compromised by a  
leak. This kind of assault targets the channel through which 
messages are transmitted. 
Man-in-the-middle (MITM) and sniffing are the most popu- 
lar methods of data eavesdropping [93]. To get access to sensi- 
tive information, an attacker may try to impersonate a trusted 
individual. It is possible for an attacker in this type of attack  
to gain access to a victim’s database by inserting malicious 
code into a programme running on the victim’s machine [94]. 
Again, The IoT application’s device efficiency and reliability 
are difficult to achieve. Verification in an IoT system can be 
difficult due to the difficulty of updating hardware components 
[95]. An assault known as ”node tampering” aims to physically 
alter nodes by physically replacing the complete node or a 
portion of the node’s hardware [96]. During the forwarding 
process, the attacker places malicious nodes on the network, 
  
 
Fig. 6. Access control challenges and it’s affected regions in IoT ecosystem 
 
 
which affects the routing path [97]. Also, Any transaction 
or operation in a system that is not authenticated is called  
non-Repudiation. When it comes to an IoT system, there is a 
lot of sensitive information that must be authenticated across 
different nodes [98]. 
 
F. Potential solutions 
There are several issues with the classic client -server IoT 
setup; access-control issues are considered the reason behind 
most of these attacks. Recent contributions have provided 
diverse solutions in various ways . For example, DDoS attacks 
are a type of cyberattack in which the target is inundated 
with so much network traffic that it is unable to handle it 
normally [99]. While conventional IoT implementations tend 
to be centralised [100], Blockchain’s decentralised security 
design ensures that each device in a network is protected in its 
own right [101]. Threats like sleep denial attacks, side-channel 
attacks, and others are mitigated by using Blockchain [18]. The 
effect on data security is another concern with integrating the 
IoT and Blockchain [102]. Security for TLS -based protocols 
like Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) [103] and 
Constrained Application Protocol(CoAP)[104] is dependent on 
a governing authority and key infrastructure [105]. Alterna - 
tively, in Blockchain networks, each device could have its own 
globally unique identifier (GUID) [106] and asymmetric key 
pair [107]. This would reduce the time required to analyse 
the data and make it more difficult for hackers to gain access. 
Blockchain’s ability to track and record data from all devices 
on a network means that enterprises can more easily detect  
and prevent security threats, including MiTM attacks, Sybil 
attacks, replay attacks, and more [108]. 
 
IV. ACCESS CONTROL CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS 
IoT devices can’t fully protect themselves because of re - 
source limitations, which makes it very challenging to offer 
secure authentication. However, a  number of academic contri - 
butions offer a list of common problems and solutions. This 
section presents an overview of many contemporary problems 
and recent contributors’ blockchain-based solutions. Figure 6 
 
Environmental IOT challenges 
 
IOT Challenges For Devices 
 
Lack of 
Resources 
 
Unclear Job 
Roles 
 
 
 
Legacy 
Liabilities 
 
 
 
Insufficient 
Knowledge 
 
 
 
Prioritization of 
Productivity 
Insecure Security 
Services 
Insecure Data 
Storage and 
Transfer 
Insufficient 
Privacy Protection 
Insecure or 
Outdated 
components 
Weak or Hard - 
coded Passwords 
Lack of Physical 
Barriers 
Lack of secure 
Update System 

--- PAGE 8 ---

8 
 
illustrates several access control issues in IoT ecosystem. It 
shows the concern that relate to access control challenges in 
the IoT ecosystem. 
A. Access control challenges 
As the majority of IoT devices have limited resources, 
including battery life, network bandwidth, and computing 
power, there are many difficulties in setting up authentication 
and access management in an IoT environment. The majority 
of traditional authentication methods require a significant 
amount of communication overhead, making them impractical 
for usage with the constrained capabilities of IoT devices 
[109]. For instance, in 2019, at least 84 distinct authentication 
algorithms [110] were either suggested or implemented for use 
in IoT contexts, according to the work of several researchers. 
Ensuring the security of devices and networks is complicated 
by the absence of standards and IoT -specific access control 
methods. Although the increased use of Internet of Things 
(IoT) devices and various applications has greatly improved 
our daily lives, it has also brought up several difficulties, 
particularly in the area of access control. 
• Device Heterogeneity: IoT devices, such as sensors, 
wearables, appliances, and industrial machinery, are pro - 
liferating quickly and come in a wide range of sizes and 
designs [111]. They used a range of communication func- 
tions and protocols. In an ecosystem, it can be difficult  
to maintain uniform access control for all devices, even 
though each one needs procedures for authentication and 
permission. A varied assortment of IoT gadgets by putting 
into practise an AoT prototype with various levels of 
security, utilising a range of platforms with various levels 
of computational capacity is presented in [112]. 
• Resource Constrain: IoT devices, especially consumer 
IoT, have a limited amount of energy, memory, and 
processing resources. It cannot be installed with highly 
computational access control software or encryption tech- 
nology, which opens many doors to security threats. 
• Scalability: An IoT ecosystem’s volume extends daily for 
its’ fine -grained automation services. In a large ecosys - 
tem (e.g., a smart city), thousands or even millions of 
connected devices can be found in IoT systems. The 
heterogeneous nature of IoT environments makes  it more 
complex to adopt traditional centralised access control, 
and continuously extensible networks make it difficult 
to manage access control policies and ensure scalability 
[113]. 
• Interoperability: Interoperability is a prerequisite for a 
smart automation system and is only achievable through  
data sharing and communication between the compo-  
nents, therefore they must cooperate across platforms, 
suppliers, and communication protocols [114]. Due to the 
heterogeneity of IoT devices, achieving seamless inter - 
operability while retaining safe access control becomes 
difficult [4]. DAAC [18] and Drupal [115] are such 
framework that expands access control functionality for 
collaborative environments. 
• Security and Privacy: End -user data is gathered and 
processed by consumer IoT; the majority of this data is 
private and sensitive, particularly for wearable IoT. Strong 
access control methods, encryption, secure authentication, 
and authorisation protocols are necessary to ensure data 
privacy and security. IoT devices are also prone to secu - 
rity flaws, and controlling access across a large number  
of potentially weak devices is difficult [116]. 
• Smart Automation: It is apparent that the IoT will 
see frequent additions and removals due to technological  
developments that make the network dynamic. Maintain-  
ing access control policies, revoking access for departed 
devices, and ensuring ongoing oversight and enforcement 
of access control rules are all very difficult tasks. 
IoT security is a technique that keeps IoT systems secure, 
and IoT security solutions may help patch vulnerabilities as 
well as defend against threats and breaches, and discover and 
monitor hazards. The majority of these breaches happen as 
a result of weaknesses in access control regulations. Many 
recent contributions have offered a variety of technological 
approaches to overcome these common difficulties, which are 
illustrated in Section IV-B. 
 
B. Typical Solutions 
A few potential tactics include the development of stan - 
dardised access control frameworks for IoT devices, the use  
of basic authentication and authorization protocols, the use of 
cloud-based access control services, the adoption of encryption 
and secure communication protocols, and regular firmware 
updates to address security flaws. Enterprises should prioritise 
security and privacy in their IoT installations and conduct 
regular security assessments and audits in order to identify  
and minimise access control risks. Many recent research 
contributions suggest various access control policies to over - 
come the existing challenges. Table III stated a few related 
contributions and their covering issues, comparing them with 
this contribution. 
In Attribute Based Access Control(ABAC) , network at - 
tributes (i.e., user identification, device kind, location, time, 
and other contextual data, etc.) are used to access control. 
ABAC is a flexible access control model that makes ac- 
cess control choices by taking into account a variety of 
user, device, and environmental aspects. It also enables dy-  
namic decision -making depending on shifting circumstances. 
Ciphertext-Policy attribute-based Encryption (CP -ABE) [130] 
is such an ABAC that avoids data tampering and eliminates 
a single point of failure with blockchain technology, where 
smart contracts improve the IoT by reducing authentication. 
Similarly, authors in [131] illustrate that the IoT, IoT de - 
vices, gateways, and attribute servers are controlled through 
blockchain. Access control and requirements also vary based 
on responsibility or roles. Role-based access control (RBAC) 
is a model that assigns permissions based on preset roles, 
where each user or device is assigned a specific role with 
associated privileges, and access. Authors in [132] proposed 
an architecture for ensuring role -based access control of web - 
enabled things in a secure and scalable manner using different 
encryption technologies. RBAC provides a structured and 
scalable approach to managing access control within IoT 

--- PAGE 9 ---

9 
 
TABLE III 
A BENCHMARKING OF RECENT REVIEWS WITH OUR CONTRIBUTIONS ON BLOCKCHAIN-BASED ACCESS CONTROL SOLUTIONS 
 
Reference ABAC Fair Access Distributed key management Token Based access control Control chain 
[117]  X X X X 
[118] X  X X X 
[119] X X X X X 
[120]  X X X  
[121] X   X X 
[122] X X  X X 
[123]  X   X 
[124] X X   X 
[125] X  X X X 
[126] X X X X  
[127] X X X X X 
[128] X  X X X 
[129] X X X X X 
Our Work      
 
systems. In technology, trust is ensured by a satisfactory 
performance rating, which in some applications helps to fix 
access control. Trust -based access control is also a well - 
utilised method in various use cases, while trust comes from 
the reputation of performance [133]. In the IoT ecosystem, 
trust-based access control focuses on building relationships 
of trust between entities. Based on variables including device 
reputation, previous behaviour, and authentication measures, 
trust can be assessed. Depending on the level of confidence 
a given entity enjoys, access decisions are made. Protection 
against unauthorized access and other security risks, such as 
those posed by a multi-tenant cloud platform, denial-of-service 
attacks, insecure interfaces and APIs, malicious attackers, 
cloud service abuse, data loss, etc., is provided via trust - 
based access control [133]. Context -aware access control is 
another kind of approach that takes into account the contextual 
information surrounding access requests [134]. It considers 
factors such as location, time, network conditions, and user 
behaviour to make access decisions. For example, access may 
be granted if the request comes from a trusted device within 
a specific location during business hours.In 2021, the cloud-  
based nature of e -health systems presents potential security 
risks, including those related to patient data confidentiality and 
privacy. If malicious users are successful in their cyber-attacks, 
important patient information may be exposed [135]. 
Moreover, Fine-grained access control for granting or 
denying access at a granular level [136], often based on 
individual resources or data elements within an IoT system. 
It allows for precise control over what resources or function - 
alities can be accessed by specific users or devices. Likely, 
Secure device onboarding and provisioning is also used 
to ensure secure onboarding and provisioning processes for 
IoT devices by validating device identity [137], establish- 
ing secure communication channels, and securely configuring 
access credentials during the initial setup phase. Device- to- 
device communication security is confirmed using any Secure 
communication protocols such as Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) [138]. 
IoT devices are increasing daily, which requires a scal - 
able, decentralised, interoperable, and dynamic access control 
platform. Using centralised, typical access control mecha-  
nisms scalability can be achieved for relatively small -scale 
systems, but it is challenging to handle the vast number of 
interconnected devices in an IoT ecosystem. Likewise, the 
heterogeneity of devices makes it more challenging to reach 
uniform access control mechanisms which are very important 
to ensure a compatible and interoperable unified platform. In 
addition, the lack of standardised protocols for access control 
makes it more complex. Ensuring the privacy of end users 
using typical access control technologies may not adequately 
address these concerns, as they primarily focus on device 
authentication and authorization without considering privacy 
protection mechanisms. 
Addressing these limitations requires the development of 
novel access control solutions tailored specifically for the 
IoT ecosystem that should be scalable, distributed, platform - 
independent, dynamic, and interoperable. Many recent contri - 
butions by researchers consider blockchains a secure solution 
to overcome those challenges, which have been described 
broadly in Section IV-C. 
 
C. Blockchain as a Solution 
Blockchain has become more popular in recent years be - 
cause of ideas like decentralized structures, security, and the 
fact that it can’t be changed. For example, Tan et al. [120] de - 
scribed ABAC and control chain method, where the Ethereum 
private chain -based access control scheme is practical and 
efficient, allowing for private, secure access in the distributed 
IoT setting. Likely, ABAC method for flexible and granular 
control over medical records is discussed in [139], [117],  
[18]. They were able to store encrypted messages using the 
hyper ledger blockchain protocol, and with the application 
of intelligent contracts, they made the messages immutable. 
Fig.7 illustrates Establishing regulations and techniques for 
controlling access to IoT devices and networks is essential for 
maintaining security. Due to the decentralisation, immutability 
of ledgers, and trust -less capacity of blockchain, many recent 
contributions introduce it as a cyber -security tool, especially 
for access control. 
A control chain method for securing access control is 
discussed in [126] that decide on which peers to interact and 
share data, blockchain nodes employ the random neighbor 
selection (RNS) method. The control chain technique is used 
to construct optimization frameworks at the consensus, data, 
network, or a mix of these layers [140]. Consensus algorithms 
targeting access control also proposed in many recent research 

--- PAGE 10 ---

10 
 
works such as Patil et al. [118] included new consensus 
algorithms for securing transactions that ensures fair access 
control method named Ripple Protocol Consensus Algorithm 
(RSPCA). Blockchain based distributed access control meth-  
ods is proposed in [129] with a very descriptive manner. 
Another distributed access control-related methods proposed in 
[123] where they explored federated learning and blockchain 
technology in a vehicular Ad Hoc Network (VANET) setting 
for smart transportation, focusing on security and privacy 
concerns. Reputation-based distributed access control ar - 
chitecture is recomended by Selcuk et al. in [141] that helps 
good peers create trust, identify and stop evil peers, and stop 
content propagation. Similarly, Tran et al. [142] proposed a 
dsitributed access control framework for P2P users. 
Contrarily, distributed essential management -related meth - 
ods are descriptively covered in [122] where authors focused 
on resource management, joint optimization, data manage - 
ment, compute offloading, and security mechanisms through 
the successful integration of blockchain and edge computing 
systems. 
Threshold signature based distributed access control uses 
threshold cryptography for Collaboration-based access control 
where members approve a new member. At least a fraction of 
the group’s members are applying. Access control lists (ACLs) 
cannot be used in a dynamic network because they are listed 
indefinitely. By discreetly sharing the signature key among 
group members and using a distributed protocol, members 
employ key sharing rather than the key itself. Threshold 
signatures can withstand system corruptions. Threshold signa - 
tures are employed in collaborative access control. In [143], 
Saxena et al. For example, a threshold signature based on the 
RSA (Rivest -Shamir-Adleman algorithm) [144], a threshold 
signature based on the DSA (Digital Signature Algorithm), a 
simple signature (PS), and Multi -signature Accountable Sub - 
group (ASM). Another DAC technique is Trusted computing- 
based technique which is only used in a real platform and 
programs in valid states, such as integrity and configuration, 
can access an item using trusted computing. The Trusted 
Reference Monitor (TRM) is an application-layer trusted com- 
puting architecture for access control for securing platform and 
software integrity and condition [145]. 
List-based DAC lists permissions which grant users and/or 
system processes access to and operations on items. Each 
access control list (ACL) item has a subject and an oper - 
ation. Fenkam et al. [146] secure mobile P2P systems in 
collaborative settings. Peer -to-peer communication is possible 
by employing access control services on a mobile teamwork 
platform (MOTION). Group signature -based DAC allows a 
Peer groups which have no hierarchy and equal rights and 
obligations. A complex event-based IoT control framework 
[147] can be built utilizing tokens and smart contracts. Smart 
contracts [148] generate a Blockchain event whenever any 
function is called by a client. To let real clients use IoT 
devices, a smart contract -based blockchain solution built on 
Ethereum is used. In the system for controlling access and 
proving who you are, the Ethereum wallet address is used 
to check the client. The sender’s access token and Ethereum 
address are only made public if the client is valid. IoT 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. IoT access control involves setting up policies and mechanisms that  
limit access to IoT devices and networks based on factors such as user identity, 
device identity, and security clearance. 
 
 
permissions can be granted using trustworthy oracles and the 
Blockchain. Service providers, Blockchain, and remote clients 
all communicate with one another via Oracle gateways [149]. 
In many applications uses customised DAC in combination 
with multiple access control mechanisms to increase security 
which is alos known as Hybird distributed access control . 
For example, Lu et al. [150] incorporate hybrid DAC reg-  
ulations into a single system based on the user’s credentials, 
identity, and/or job. A non-centralized role-mapping technique 
is adopted [151] . Primary Backup (PB) fault -tolerant network 
job scheduling is utilized in multiprocessor system [152]. 
 
V. ATTACKS ON BLOCKCHAIN 
Blockchain is renowned for its integrated security features 
and success statistics. However, there are some examples 
of attacks on existing Blockchain applications. This section 
illustrates some real- life attacks discussed in various research 
studies. Figure 8 describes layer -based Blockchain attacks, 
which encompass a broad category of attacks that aim to 
compromise various parts of the Blockchain protocol. The goal 
of these attacks is to weaken the Blockchain’s defences by 
exploiting flaws in a particular layer. Attacks at the network 
layer, such as DDoS, can disrupt services and make consensus 
less reliable. Smart contract flaws can be exploited at the appli- 
cation layer. This includes attacks such as reentrancy attacks, 
in which the attacker manipulates the execution flow within 
a smart contract, potentially causing undesirable outcomes or 
financial losses. 
 
A. Consensus Related Attack 
• Double Spending Attacks: The double -spending attack 
is one of the well -known attacks discussed in many arti - 
cles like in [153]. Attacks involving double spending can 
also be dangerous in the context of the IoT. Blockchain 
technology is used in IoT systems to enable device 


--- PAGE 11 ---

11 
 
become confused and waste their resources on useless 
activities [164]. Since miners are what add new blocks to 
the Blockchain, this vulnerability affects everyone[165]. 
Valid blocks are withheld or invalid ones are added by 
some miners, making it harder to contribute real blocks 
[166]. 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Layer-based attacks in the Blockchain based IoT ecosystem 
 
 
interaction and value exchange. In public Blockchain, 
consensus process responsible to protect double-spending 
occurrences. In this instance, a decentralised network of 
users known as ”miners” has performed the verification. 
Adding a transaction to the growing list of blocks means 
it has been checked and is legitimate. It becomes harder 
to reverse a transaction and spend the same money twice 
as more blocks are uploaded to the Blockchain[154]. 
• 51% attack: In the context of blockchain, a 51% attack 
occurs when one entity, or a collection of cooperating 
entities, controls more than 50% of the network’s total 
processing power (hashrate) [155]. With this much power, 
they can influence the blockchain and maybe commit 
crimes like double spending or transaction censorship. 
A 51% attack can pose a serious risk to the integrity of 
blockchain-based IoT systems in the context of the IoT. 
Over 18 USD million in Bitcoin Gold (BTG) was double 
spent as a result of an assault in 2018 [156]. Similarly, 
over 100,000 USD worth of Vertcoin (VTC) was doubled 
in 2018 as a result of many attacks on the cryptocurrency 
[157]. A 2019 attack on Ethereum Classic (ETC) led to 
the double spending of more than 1 million USD of the 
cryptocurrency [158]. Three other attacks were also made 
against the cryptocurrency in 2020. Grin (GRIN) was the 
target of a 2020 attack, but the Blockchain was able to 
retake control [159]. In 2021, Bitcoin SV (BSV) was the 
target of three attacks that diminished its standing [160]. 
 
B. Selfish Mining Attack 
When one consensus participant or miner or a group of 
miners changes the Blockchain to help themselves, this  
is called ”selfish mining.” Miners ”hide” their created 
blocks with this approach [161]. Bitcoin miners may be 
considered ”Greedy” due to their pursuit of the block 
reward. While the selfish mining attack outlined here 
applies solely to evil miners, other miners are legitimate 
and reasonable [162]. Dishonest miners in selfish mining 
engage in data hiding and cause harm to other honest 
miners in two ways: (i) by receiving an unfair reward  
that is higher than the value of their offer of processing 
control spent [163], and (ii) by causing other miners to 
C. Smart contract-based attacks 
The blockchain facilitates the operation of decentralized 
apps through smart contracts, which are self-executing lines of 
code. In the context of the IoT ecosystem, smart contract-based 
attacks on blockchain may target flaws in the smart contracts’ 
source code or take advantage of their interactions with IoT 
devices [167]. As a result, once the smart contract has begun, it 
cannot be terminated. Furthermore, once a Blockchain- based 
transaction has been confirmed, it can no longer be altered.  
As a result, millions of dollars are at risk with no recourse if 
intelligent contracts are flawed. More than 3 million USD was 
stolen from The Tinyman exchange, which was built on the 
Algorand Blockchain in January 2022 [168]. In the Wormhole 
Cross Chain Bridge Attack of February 2022, almost 320 
million USD were stolen from Ethereum and Solana [169]. In 
August 2022, about 8 million USD worth of Solana was lost 
when thousands of users experienced difficulties with account 
imports [170]. By August of 2021, hackers had stolen $613 
million from a crypt by exploiting flaws in the Poly Network’s 
smart contracts [171]. 
 
D. Brute-Force Attack 
A Brute-force attack is an improved version of the Finney 
attack in which an intelligent attacker takes command of n 
nodes in the network and uses them to execute a private mining 
scheme designed to carry out a Double -Spend assault [172].  
In order to gain unauthorised access or affect the behaviour of 
the blockchain network, brute -force attacks against IoT -based 
blockchain systems often require making an attempt to guess 
or exhaustively testing several permutations of cryptographic 
keys or credentials. In a repeat of previous assaults, a malicious 
actor presents a double -spending transaction in a block while 
simultaneously expanding a private Blockchain [173]. The 
brute force attack and customer account breach at Dunkin’ 
Donuts cost 650,000 USD in fines and damages and com - 
pelled the company to change all user passwords and increase 
application security [174]. There was no mention of monetary 
losses; however, nearly 20.6 million Alibaba accounts were 
hacked, and all users were instructed to change their passwords 
[175]. 
 
E. Peer-to-peer network attacks 
A Peer-to-peer (P2P) network where all participating peers 
run the protocol and have a copy of the transaction Ledger 
[176] allows for decentralized value exchanges via consensus. 
P2P network attacks against IoT devices inside a decentralised 
network can take advantage of communication and coordina - 
tion flaws amongst IoT devices. The integrity, availability, and 
 
 
Hardware 
 
 
 
 
Device SDK 
 
 
 
Connectivity 
 
 
 
 
Gateway 
 
 
 
Data Storage 
 
 
 
Data Analysis 
 
Attacks 
 
Components 
 
   
Phishing Attack DDoS Attack Dao Attack 
   
MITM Brute Force Attack  DNS spoofing 
   
Sybil Attack  DDoS Attack Smart Contract Based  Attack 
 
   
Wallet Based  Attack   Malware  51% Attack 
   
DNS spoofing Ransomware  Sybil Attack 
   
Dao Attack Phishing Attack  Malware 
 


--- PAGE 12 ---

12 
 
privacy of IoT devices may be jeopardised by these assaults, 
which have the potential to target different P2P network 
components. Following are a few instances of P2P network 
assaults in the IoT ecosystem and possible defences: 
• Sybil attack: Sybil attacks occur when a single attacker 
assumes the identities of several targets. In the IoT 
ecosystem, Sybil attacks can lead to unauthorized access, 
data manipulation, or disruption of IoT device interac - 
tions. As such, it ranks high on the list of challenges one 
faces while trying to join a P2P system [177]. A Sybil 
attack and traffic confirmation attack were conducted 
against Tor in 2014 [178]. Other Sybil assaults on Tor 
users exist. This covers 2020 Bitcoin rewriting attacks. 
An attacker controlled a fourth of all Tor exit relays 
and used SSL stripping to downgrade secure connections 
and redirect payments to BTCMITM20’s wallet [179]. 
Another example is KAX17’s 2017 -2021 attack. This 
group controlled 900 malicious servers, mostly midway 
points, to deanonymize Tor users [180]. 
• Distributed denial -of-service: A distributed denial- of- 
service (DDoS) assault is one in which numerous hacked 
computers work together to disrupt service for those 
attempting to access the attacked resource[124]. Targeting 
IoT devices in the P2P network, DDoS assaults over - 
load them with a large volume of requests or malicious 
traffic, making them unreachable or interfering with  
their functioning. To disrupt legitimate users or systems, 
DDoS uses a barrage of incoming messages, connection 
requests, or corrupted packets to slow down or shut  
down the target system [181]. GitHub was hit by the 
largest DDoS attack ever in 2018 [182] [183]. Millions  
of programmers worldwide use the site to upload and 
distribute source code. In the year 2020, the New Zealand 
stock exchange was taken down by a massive distributed 
denial of service attack[184]. In 2019, China’s Great 
Cannon DDoS operation clogged the internet by attacking 
a Hong Kong protest website. Hackers, hacktivists, and 
government-affiliated organizations use DDoS attacks in 
social movements. DDoS assaults can draw attention to a 
group or cause. Fancy Bear and Armada Collective have 
threatened DDoS attacks on numerous organizations in 
2020. This combines DDoS with ransomware [185]. 
 
F. Decentralised Autonomous Oragnisation (DAO) Attack 
DAO is an autonomous organization with no central lead-  
ership that codifies a company’s internal procedures so that 
manual processes and human oversight of decentralized sys - 
tems are unnecessary. This can be applied to IoT systems 
to create self -governing, transparent, decision making, data - 
sharing interoperability and autonomous networks of inter - 
connected devices. Slock is an successful example of DAO 
application for Crowdfunding which was able to raise 12.7 
million ether (about 150 million USD) [186]. However, a 
malicious actor discovers a flaw in the program. Thus, the 
attacker begins the attack by depositing a little amount and 
then using a recursive withdraw method to extract 70 million 
USD [187]. The Ethereum Foundation issued a warning to a 
potential attacker, threatening to freeze their account until they 
stopped participating in the contract or agreed to a hard fork.  
A while later, he put a halt to the assault. This attack on a 
DAO has generated many future worries about the autonomy 
of smart contracts [188]. 
 
G. Wallet-based attacks 
The wallet automates payments in BC which is executed 
through Network nodes payment processing. A wallet -based 
attack in the context of IoT systems typically refers to an 
attack targeting the digital wallets or cryptocurrency wallets 
associated with IoT devices. A Blockchain wallet may be 
targeted if a node executes a malicious behavior [189]. In 
an instance of responsibility, an attacker took 77 million 
USD from a parity client’s wallet, which required multi- sign 
verification [190]. To reduce transaction fees, the multi -sign 
party wallet employs a library contract. An attacker exploited 
security flaws in this functionality [191]. When the attacker 
listed his account as the library’s owner, he gained equal 
ownership of all wallets [192]. Next, the attacker alters the 
library code that froze the currency. 
Blockchain is widely popular for cryptocurrencies where 
transactions are not continuous. For instance, when the sender 
sends and the recipient receives, the transaction is done. 
Contrarily, transactions in the IoT ecosystem are typically 
continuous even when their outcomes are used as a separate 
parameter to control other devices [10]. For instance, when 
a fire alarm sounds, an automatic tap will open as soon as 
the smoke detector responds. As a result, it differs greatly  
from financial transactions, which call for quick choices. 
While blockchain technology has many advantages for IoT 
access control, it is still in its infancy and cannot resolve all 
complex problems. Scalability, for instance, will be difficult  
as IoT devices and transactions grow in quantity [17], [113]. 
This might strain the blockchain network, resulting in slower 
transaction processing times and higher costs. In addition, 
massive IoT devices are being connected throughout the 
ecosystem to handle enormous volumes of transactions. As 
a result, their consensus approval, and fitting transactions into 
ledgers require a lot of bandwidth, which also increases latency 
[193]. Implementing a time -sensitive, blockchain- based IoT 
ecosystem could be exceedingly difficult due to this latency. 
This latency can be a drawback in the context of IoT access 
control, where real-time interactions are essential. 
 
VI. FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTION 
In fact, both the academic community and the business 
world pay close attention to blockchain. It is still not developed 
enough to be adopted in all application domains, despite being 
a ten -year-old technology. Large IT corporations, including 
IBM, Intel, and others, have already launched their blockchain- 
based service platforms for a variety of small and medium - 
sized businesses, but independent service providers are still  
far behind. As a result, there are several chances for this 
technology to be developed through study and commercial  
use. This section focuses on a few of the potential avenues 

--- PAGE 13 ---

13 
 
for future research that we have identified from various recent 
research contributions. 
 
• Performance and scalability: Scalability of blockchains 
is still an important subject for research. In order to 
increase the scalability and performance of blockchain - 
based IoT systems, researchers should look into methods 
like sharding, off -chain transactions, and layer -two solu- 
tions [17]. It’s also critical to research efficient consensus 
techniques for low-resource IoT devices. 
• Privacy and confidentiality: It’s crucial to improve 
privacy and secrecy in blockchain-based IoT systems. IoT 
scenarios can benefit from the investigation of techniques 
like homomorphic encryption, zero -knowledge proofs, 
and secure multiparty computation. To safeguard the 
identity and operations of IoT devices, research can be 
done on anonymization and unlinkability technologies. 
• Interoperability for Automation: To enable seamless 
communication and collaboration targeting smart au-  
tomation between various IoT devices and blockchain 
networks, interoperability frameworks and standards for 
blockchain-based IoT systems must be researched . The 
full potential of decentralised IoT ecosystems can be 
unlocked by creating protocols and designs that enable 
interoperability across multiple blockchain platforms and 
IoT protocols [114]. 
• Governance and consensus: For blockchain- based IoT 
systems, investigating efficient governance models and 
incentive structures can guarantee equitable and effective 
decision-making, resource distribution, and participation. 
Creating incentives for device owners, users, and other 
stakeholders to take part in the blockchain network and 
aid in its growth is essential. Study governance models 
for private blockchains, including consensus algorithms 
and decision-making processes [193]. Research can focus 
on designing consensus mechanisms that are efficient, 
secure, and suitable for the specific requirements of 
private blockchain networks. 
• Security and robustness: It is necessary to conduct 
research on cutting -edge cryptographic methods, secure 
key management, and secure hardware integration to 
improve trust and security in blockchain- based IoT sys - 
tems. Important research areas include exploring secure 
firmware upgrades and safe bootstrapping procedures for 
IoT devices, as well as investigating techniques to detect 
and mitigate assaults like Sybil and 51% attacks [194]. 
• Integration with Edge Computing: Investigating the 
integration of blockchain with edge computing can bring 
computation and storage capabilities closer to IoT de - 
vices, reducing latency and improving responsiveness. 
Blockchain-based IoT systems can be effectively imple-  
mented through research on the distributed execution of 
smart contracts at the edge, secure data sharing between 
edge nodes, and optimised resource management. 
• Real-World Applications: Research on actual use cases 
and applications of blockchain- based IoT systems might 
shed light on their advantages and practical difficulties 
. Finding specific requirements, creating best practises, 
and evaluating the impact of blockchain technology in 
various contexts can all be aided by investigating areas 
like supply chain management, energy grids, healthcare, 
and smart cities [195]. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This article examines the IoT ecosystem’s general security 
concerns and potential remedies. To make things more appar - 
ent, we have concentrated on three crucial factors: the most 
common threats, security challenges and their current reme - 
dies, particularly in access control, and finally, blockchain-  
based solutions. We have summarised recent related surveys 
and the gap that we have filled in this article. For example, 
most of the recent contributions identify access control as one 
of the key challenges in the IoT ecosystem. In addition, a  
huge number of them suggested blockchain as a potential 
solution. Considering this fact, we reviewed the majority of  
the access control challenges and considered the articles that 
contributed to blockchain as potential solutions. We focus 
on every technical aspect that can impact an IoT system’s 
security. As blockchain is widely considered, we further tried 
to summarise recent track records of attacks on blockchain. 
We believe proper technical analysis of these attacks can aid 
academics in identifying research gaps in the IoT ecosystem. 
The research gaps in this area have yet to be filled, which we 
listed in future directions for further research. The researchers 
who are working in this field will be guided by the direction  
of future research. This essay wraps up recent ideas on 
guaranteeing access control in the IoT ecosystem. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Holler, V. Tsiatsis, C. Mulligan, S. Karnouskos, S. Avesand, and 
D. Boyle, Internet of Things. Academic Press, 2014. 
[2] M. M. Hasan, M. A. Rahman, A. Sedigh, A. U. Khasanah, A. T.  
Asyhari, H. Tao, and S. A. Bakar, “Search and rescue operation in  
flooded areas: A survey on emerging sensor networking -enabled iot- 
oriented technologies and applications,” Cognitive Systems Research , 
vol. 67, pp. 104–123, 2021. 
[3] S. Al-Sarawi, M. Anbar, R. Abdullah, and A. B. Al Hawari, “Internet  
of things market analysis forecasts, 2020–2030,” in 2020 Fourth World 
Conference on smart trends in systems, security and sustainability  
(WorldS4), pp. 449–453, IEEE, 2020. 
[4] S. Biswas, Z. Yao, L. Yan, A. Alqhatani, A. K. Bairagi, F. Asiri, 
and M. Masud, “Interoperability benefits and challenges in smart city  
services: Blockchain as a solution,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 4, 2023. 
[5] H. R. Lim, K. S. Khoo, W. Y. Chia, K. W. Chew, S.-H. Ho, and 
P. L. Show, “Smart microalgae farming with internet -of-things for  
sustainable agriculture,” Biotechnology Advances, p. 107931, 2022. 
[6] S. P. Ramu, P. Boopalan, Q.-V. Pham, P. K. R. Maddikunta, T. Huynh- 
The, M. Alazab, T. T. Nguyen, and T. R. Gadekallu, “Federated  
learning enabled digital twins for smart cities: Concepts, recent ad - 
vances, and future directions,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 79, 
p. 103663, 2022. 
[7] C. Perera, C. H. Liu, and S. Jayawardena, “The emerging internet of  
things marketplace from an industrial perspective: A survey,” IEEE  
transactions on emerging topics in computing , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 585 – 
598, 2015. 
[8] M. H. Kashani, M. Madanipour, M. Nikravan, P. Asghari, and 
E. Mahdipour, “A systematic review of iot in healthcare: Applications, 
techniques, and trends,” Journal of Network and Computer Applica - 
tions, vol. 192, p. 103164, 2021. 
[9] B. Nour, K. Sharif, F. Li, S. Biswas, H. Moungla, M. Guizani, and 
Y. Wang, “A survey of internet of things communication using icn: 
A use case perspective,” Computer Communications, vol. 142-143, 
pp. 95–123, 2019. 

--- PAGE 14 ---

14 
 
[10] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, and S. Mohanty, “Blockchain for e- health- 
care systems: Easier said than done,” Computer, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 57– 
67, 2020. 
[11] W. Ejaz and A. Anpalagan, Blockchain Technology for Security and  
Privacy in Internet of Things, pp. 47–55. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2019. 
[12] T. Dalgleish, J. M. G. Williams, A.- M. J. Golden, N. Perkins, L. F.  
Barrett, P. J. Barnard, C. A. Yeung, V. Murphy, R. Elward, K. Tchan - 
turia, et al., “The blockchain -enabled intelligent iot economy,” J Exp  
Psychol Gen, vol. 136, pp. 23–42, 2018. 
[13] A. Javaid, Q. Niyaz, W. Sun, and M. Alam, “A deep learning approach 
for network intrusion detection system,” Eai Endorsed Transactions on 
Security and Safety, vol. 3, no. 9, p. e2, 2016. 
[14] M. A. Ferrag, M. Derdour, M. Mukherjee, A. Derhab, L. Maglaras,  
and H. Janicke, “Blockchain technologies for the internet of things:  
Research issues and challenges,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2188–2204, 2018. 
[15] L. Cui, S. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Pan, M. Xu, and K. Xu, “An efficient  
and compacted dag-based blockchain protocol for industrial internet of 
things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, 
pp. 4134–4145, 2019. 
[16] K.-K. R. Choo, Z. Yan, and W. Meng, “Blockchain in industrial iot  
applications: security and privacy advances, challenges, and opportu - 
nities,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 6, 
pp. 4119–4121, 2020. 
[17] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, B. Nour, and Y. Wang, “A scalable  
blockchain framework for secure transactions in iot,” IEEE Internet 
of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4650–4659, 2019. 
[18] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, I. Alam, and S. P. Mohanty, “Daac: Digital  
asset access control in a unified blockchain based e- health system,” 
IEEE Transactions on Big Data, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1273–1287, 2022. 
[19] M. Sookhak, M. R. Jabbarpour, N. S. Safa, and F. R. Yu, “Blockchain  
and smart contract for access control in healthcare: a survey, issues  
and challenges, and open issues,” Journal of Network and Computer  
Applications, vol. 178, p. 102950, 2021. 
[20] F. Ghaffari, E. Bertin, J. Hatin, and N. Crespi, “Authentication and  
access control based on distributed ledger technology: a survey,” in  
2020 2nd Conference on Blockchain Research & Applications for  
Innovative Networks and Services (BRAINS), pp. 79–86, IEEE, 2020. 
[21] P. Bagga, A. K. Das, V. Chamola, and M. Guizani, “Blockchain - 
envisioned access control for internet of things applications: a com - 
prehensive survey and future directions,” Telecommunication Systems, 
pp. 1–49, 2022. 
[22] S. Pal, A. Dorri, and R. Jurdak, “Blockchain for iot access control:  
Recent trends and future research directions,” Journal of Network and  
Computer Applications, p. 103371, 2022. 
[23] M. Shakarami, J. Benson, and R. Sandhu, “Blockchain -based adminis- 
tration of access in smart home iot,” in Proceedings of the 2022 ACM  
Workshop on Secure and Trustworthy Cyber-Physical Systems, pp. 57– 
66, 2022. 
[24] R. Sekaran, R. Patan, A. Raveendran, F. Al -Turjman, M. Ramachan - 
dran, and L. Mostarda, “Survival study on blockchain based 6g-enabled 
mobile edge computation for iot automation,” IEEE access, vol. 8, 
pp. 143453–143463, 2020. 
[25] M. Abubakar, Z. Jaroucheh, A. Al Dubai, and B. Buchanan, “A  
decentralised authentication and access control mechanism for medical 
wearable sensors data,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on  
Omni-Layer Intelligent Systems (COINS), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 2021. 
[26] L. Bai, M. Hu, M. Liu, and J. Wang, “Bpiiot: A light -weighted 
blockchain-based platform for industrial iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, 
pp. 58381–58393, 2019. 
[27] F. Wang, Z. Hu, H. Wang, X. Chen, and W. Feng, “Cross -domain 
dynamic access control based on “blockchain+ artificial intelligence”,” 
Neural Computing and Applications, pp. 1–11, 2023. 
[28] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, R. M. Parizi, G. Srivastava, and 
H. Karimipour, “Secure intelligent fuzzy blockchain framework: Effec- 
tive threat detection in iot networks,” Computers in Industry, vol. 144, 
p. 103801, 2023. 
[29] K. H. Y. Chung, D. Li, and P. Adriaens, “Technology-enabled financing 
of sustainable infrastructure: A case for blockchains and decentral - 
ized oracle networks,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 
vol. 187, p. 122258, 2023. 
[30] M. S. Mahmood and N. B. Al Dabagh, “Blockchain technology and in- 
ternet of things: review, challenge and security concern,” International 
Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 718, 
2023. 
[31] Originstamp, “Benefits and challenges of blockchain in iot,” 2021. 
[32] B. K. Mohanta, D. Jena, U. Satapathy, and S. Patnaik, “Survey on 
iot security: Challenges and solution using machine learning, artificial  
intelligence and blockchain technology,” Internet of Things, vol. 11, 
p. 100227, 2020. 
[33] X. Wang, X. Zha, W. Ni, R. P. Liu, Y. J. Guo, X. Niu, and K. Zheng, 
“Survey on blockchain for internet of things,” Computer Communica- 
tions, vol. 136, pp. 10–29, 2019. 
[34] R. A. Memon, J. P. Li, J. Ahmed, M. I. Nazeer, M. Ismail, and 
K. Ali, “Cloud -based vs. blockchain -based iot: a comparative survey  
and way forward,” Frontiers of Information Technology & Electronic  
Engineering, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 563–586, 2020. 
[35] W. Gao, W. G. Hatcher, and W. Yu, “A survey of blockchain:  
Techniques, applications, and challenges,” in 2018 27th international  
conference on computer communication and networks (ICCCN), pp. 1– 
11, IEEE, 2018. 
[36] H.-N. Dai, Z. Zheng, and Y. Zhang, “Blockchain for internet of things: 
A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8076 – 
8094, 2019. 
[37] M. A. Uddin, A. Stranieri, I. Gondal, and V. Balasubramanian, “A  
survey on the adoption of blockchain in iot: Challenges and solutions,” 
Blockchain: Research and Applications, p. 100006, 2021. 
[38] F. Alkurdi, I. Elgendi, K. S. Munasinghe, D. Sharma, and A. Ja - 
malipour, “Blockchain in iot security: a survey,” in 2018 28th In - 
ternational Telecommunication Networks and Applications Conference 
(ITNAC), pp. 1–4, IEEE, 2018. 
[39] A. Panarello, N. Tapas, G. Merlino, F. Longo, and A. Puliafito,  
“Blockchain and iot integration: A systematic survey,” Sensors, vol. 18, 
no. 8, p. 2575, 2018. 
[40] E. F. Jesus, V. R. Chicarino, C. V. De Albuquerque, and A. A. d. A.  
Rocha, “A survey of how to use blockchain to secure internet of 
things and the stalker attack,” Security and Communication Networks , 
vol. 2018, 2018. 
[41] M. Salimitari and M. Chatterjee, “A survey on consensus protocols in  
blockchain for iot networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.05613, 2018. 
[42] Q. Feng, D. He, S. Zeadally, M. K. Khan, and N. Kumar, “A survey  
on privacy protection in blockchain system,” Journal of Network and  
Computer Applications, vol. 126, pp. 45–58, 2019. 
[43] M. Wu, K. Wang, X. Cai, S. Guo, M. Guo, and C. Rong, “A  
comprehensive survey of blockchain: From theory to iot applications  
and beyond,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8114– 
8154, 2019. 
[44] R. Thakore, R. Vaghashiya, C. Patel, and N. Doshi, “Blockchain-based 
iot: A survey,” Procedia Computer Science , vol. 155, pp. 704 –709, 
2019. 
[45] J. Zhang, S. Zhong, T. Wang, H.- C. Chao, and J. Wang, “Blockchain - 
based systems and applications: a survey,” Journal of Internet Technol- 
ogy, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2020. 
[46] A. Al Sadawi, M. S. Hassan, and M. Ndiaye, “A survey on the inte-  
gration of blockchain with iot to enhance performance and eliminate  
challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 54478–54497, 2021. 
[47] L. Da Xu, Y. Lu, and L. Li, “Embedding blockchain technology into  
iot for security: a survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021. 
[48] S. Namane and I. Ben Dhaou, “Blockchain -based access control  
techniques for iot applications,” Electronics , vol. 11, no. 14, p. 2225,  
2022. 
[49] P. Sharma, R. Jindal, and M. D. Borah, “Blockchain -based cloud stor- 
age system with cp -abe-based access control and revocation process,”  
The Journal of Supercomputing, pp. 1–29, 2022. 
[50] M. S. Rahman, M. A. Islam, M. A. Uddin, and G. Stea, “A survey 
of blockchain-based iot ehealthcare: Applications, research issues, and  
challenges,” Internet of Things, vol. 19, p. 100551, 2022. 
[51] J. Han, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Li, M. Xian, H. Wang, F. Mao, and Y. Chen, 
“A blockchain -based and sgx -enabled access control framework for  
iot,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 17, p. 2710, 2022. 
[52] M. M. Ahemd, M. A. Shah, and A. Wahid, “Iot security: A layered  
approach for attacks & defenses,” in 2017 international conference on 
Communication Technologies (ComTech), pp. 104–110, IEEE, 2017. 
[53] L. C. Mutalemwa and S. Shin, “Comprehensive performance analysis  
of privacy protection protocols utilizing fake packet injection tech - 
niques,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 76935–76950, 2020. 
[54] H. Pirayesh, P. K. Sangdeh, and H. Zeng, “Securing zigbee communi - 
cations against constant jamming attack using neural network,” IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 4957–4968, 2020. 
[55] A. Bose, G. S. Aujla, M. Singh, N. Kumar, and H. Cao, “Blockchain  
as a service for software defined networks: A denial of service 
attack perspective,” in 2019 IEEE Intl Conf on Dependable, Au - 
tonomic and Secure Computing, Intl Conf on Pervasive Intelli- 

--- PAGE 15 ---

15 
 
gence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and Big Data Com- 
puting, Intl Conf on Cyber Science and Technology Congress  
(DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), pp. 901–906, IEEE, 2019. 
[56] I. Andrea, C. Chrysostomou, and G. Hadjichristofi, “Internet of things: 
Security vulnerabilities and challenges,” in 2015 IEEE Symposium on  
Computers and Communication (ISCC), pp. 180–187, 2015. 
[57] E. Stancu, M. Berceanu, S. Halunga, and O. Fratu, “Rfid sensitivity 
in narrowband jamming environment,” in Advanced Topics in Opto - 
electronics, Microelectronics, and Nanotechnologies XI, vol. 12493, 
pp. 699–703, SPIE, 2023. 
[58] R. Sahay, G. Geethakumari, and B. Mitra, “A novel blockchain based  
framework to secure iot-llns against routing attacks,” Computing, 
vol. 102, no. 11, pp. 2445–2470, 2020. 
[59] A. McCarthy, E. Ghadafi, P. Andriotis, and P. Legg, “Defending against 
adversarial machine learning attacks using hierarchical learning: A case 
study on network traffic attack classification,” Journal of Information  
Security and Applications, vol. 72, p. 103398, 2023. 
[60] S. Luo, Y. Lai, and J. Liu, “Selective forwarding attack detection 
and network recovery mechanism based on cloud-edge cooperation 
in software-defined wireless sensor network,” Computers & Security , 
vol. 126, p. 103083, 2023. 
[61] P. Varga, S. Plosz, G. Soos, and C. Hegedus, “Security threats and  
issues in automation iot,” in 2017 IEEE 13th International Workshop  
on Factory Communication Systems (WFCS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017. 
[62] A. La Salle, A. Kumar, P. Jevtic´, and D. Boscovic, “Joint modeling  
of hyperledger fabric and sybil attack: Petri net approach,” Simulation 
Modelling Practice and Theory, vol. 122, p. 102674, 2023. 
[63] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, and Y. Liu, “3p framework: Customizable  
permission architecture for mobile applications,” in Wireless Algo - 
rithms, Systems, and Applications (L. Ma, A. Khreishah, Y. Zhang, and 
M. Yan, eds.), (Cham), pp. 445–456, Springer International Publishing, 
2017. 
[64] S. Biswas, W. Haipeng, and J. Rashid, “Android Permissions Man - 
agement at App Installing,” International Journal of Security and Its  
Applications, pp. 223–232, mar 10 2016. 
[65] A. B. de Neira, B. Kantarci, and M. Nogueira, “Distributed denial of  
service attack prediction: Challenges, open issues and opportunities,”  
Computer Networks, p. 109553, 2023. 
[66] R. Singh, S. Tanwar, and T. P. Sharma, “Utilization of blockchain 
for mitigating the distributed denial of service attacks,” Security and  
Privacy, vol. 3, no. 3, p. e96, 2020. 
[67] A. Buriro, A. B. Buriro, T. Ahmad, S. Buriro, and S. Ullah, “Malwd&c: 
A quick and accurate machine learning -based approach for malware 
detection and categorization,” Applied Sciences, vol. 13, no. 4, p. 2508, 
2023. 
[68] X. Ling, L. Wu, J. Zhang, Z. Qu, W. Deng, X. Chen, Y. Qian, C. Wu, 
S. Ji, T. Luo, et al. , “Adversarial attacks against windows pe malware  
detection: A survey of the state-of-the-art,” Computers & Security, 
p. 103134, 2023. 
[69] G. A. Abdalrahman and H. Varol, “Defending against cyber-attacks on 
the internet of things,” in 2019 7th International Symposium on Digital 
Forensics and Security (ISDFS), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019. 
[70] A. C. B. Monteiro, R. P. Franc¸a, R. Arthur, and Y. Iano, “The  
fundamentals and potential for cyber security of machine learning in  
the modern world,” in Advanced Smart Computing Technologies in  
Cybersecurity and Forensics, pp. 119–137, CRC Press, 2021. 
[71] A. Dua, V. Tyagi, N. Patel, and B. Mehtre, “Iisr: A secure router for iot 
networks,” in 2019 4th international conference on information systems 
and computer networks (ISCON), pp. 636–643, IEEE, 2019. 
[72] I. Alam, K. Sharif, F. Li, Z. Latif, M. M. Karim, S. Biswas, B. Nour,  
and Y. Wang, “A survey of network virtualization techniques for  
internet of things using sdn and nfv,” vol. 53, apr 2020. 
[73] J. Sengupta, S. Ruj, and S. Dasbit, “A comprehensive survey on attacks, 
security issues and blockchain solutions for iot and iiot,” Journal of  
Network and Computer Applications, 11 2019. 
[74] P. Shaverdian, “Start with trust: utilizing blockchain to resolve the third- 
party data breach problem,” UCLA L. Rev., vol. 66, p. 1242, 2019. 
[75] W. Feng, Y. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yan, and L. Chen, “Blockchain-based data 
transmission control for tactical data link,” Digital Communications  
and Networks, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 285–294, 2021. 
[76] C. DeCusatis, M. Zimmermann, and A. Sager, “Identity-based network 
security for commercial blockchain services,” in 2018 IEEE 8th Annual 
Computing and Communication Workshop and Conference (CCWC), 
pp. 474–477, IEEE, 2018. 
[77] B. Mohanta, U. Satapathy, S. Panda, and D. Jena, “A novel approach to 
solve security and privacy issues for iot applications using blockchain,” 
pp. 394–399, 12 2019. 
[78] M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, X. Yang, A. Derhab, and L. Maglaras, “Security  
and privacy for green iot -based agriculture: Review, blockchain solu - 
tions, and challenges,” IEEE access, vol. 8, pp. 32031–32053, 2020. 
[79] N. Waheed, X. He, M. Ikram, M. Usman, S. S. Hashmi, and M. Usman, 
“Security and privacy in iot using machine learning and blockchain:  
Threats and countermeasures,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 
vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2020. 
[80] Y. Yu, Y. Li, J. Tian, and J. Liu, “Blockchain -based solutions to 
security and privacy issues in the internet of things,” IEEE Wireless  
Communications, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 12–18, 2018. 
[81] N. M. Kumar and P. K. Mallick, “Blockchain technology for security  
issues and challenges in iot,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 132, 
pp. 1815–1823, 2018. 
[82] S. N. Mohanty, K. Ramya, S. S. Rani, D. Gupta, K. Shankar, S. Lak - 
shmanaprabu, and A. Khanna, “An efficient lightweight integrated  
blockchain (elib) model for iot security and privacy,” Future Generation 
Computer Systems, vol. 102, pp. 1027–1037, 2020. 
[83] S.-Y. Kuo, F.-H. Tseng, and Y.-H. Chou, “Metaverse intrusion detection 
of wormhole attacks based on a novel statistical mechanism,” Future  
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 143, pp. 179–190, 2023. 
[84] S. M. Nair, V. Ramesh, and A. K. Tyagi, “Issues and challenges  
(privacy, security, and trust) in blockchain -based applications,” in  
Research Anthology on Convergence of Blockchain, Internet of Things, 
and Security, pp. 1101–1114, IGI Global, 2023. 
[85] K. Hameed, M. Barika, S. Garg, M. B. Amin, and B. Kang, “A tax - 
onomy study on securing blockchain -based industrial applications: An 
overview, application perspectives, requirements, attacks, countermea - 
sures, and open issues,” Journal of Industrial Information Integration , 
vol. 26, p. 100312, 2022. 
[86] B. S. Egala, A. K. Pradhan, V. Badarla, and S. P. Mohanty, “Fortified - 
chain: a blockchain-based framework for security and privacy -assured 
internet of medical things with effective access control,” IEEE Internet 
of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 11717–11731, 2021. 
[87] D. Gupta, S. Bhatt, M. Gupta, O. Kayode, and A. S. Tosun, “Access  
control model for google cloud iot,” in 2020 IEEE 6th Intl Conference 
on Big Data Security on Cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE Intl Confer - 
ence on High Performance and Smart Computing,(HPSC) and IEEE  
Intl Conference on Intelligent Data and Security (IDS) , pp. 198 –208, 
IEEE, 2020. 
[88] M. El-Hajj, A. Fadlallah, M. Chamoun, and A. Serhrouchni, “A survey 
of internet of things (iot) authentication schemes,” Sensors, vol. 19,  
no. 5, p. 1141, 2019. 
[89] N. Tapas, G. Merlino, and F. Longo, “Blockchain -based iot -cloud 
authorization and delegation,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference 
on Smart Computing (SMARTCOMP), pp. 411–416, IEEE, 2018. 
[90] N. Bhalaji, “Reliable data transmission with heightened confidentiality 
and integrity in iot empowered mobile networks,” Journal of ISMAC , 
vol. 2, no. 02, pp. 106–117, 2020. 
[91] N. F. Syed, Z. Baig, A. Ibrahim, and C. Valli, “Denial of service attack 
detection through machine learning for the iot,” Journal of Information 
and Telecommunication, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 482–503, 2020. 
[92] X. Yu, J. Qiu, X. Yang, Y. Cong, and L. Du, “An graph-based adaptive 
method for fast detection of transformed data leakage in iot via wsn,”  
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 137111–137121, 2019. 
[93] S. Andy, B. Rahardjo, and B. Hanindhito, “Attack scenarios and  
security analysis of mqtt communication protocol in iot system,” in  
2017 4th international conference on electrical engineering, computer  
science and informatics (EECSI), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2017. 
[94] S. J. Lee, P. D. Yoo, A. T. Asyhari, Y. Jhi, L. Chermak, C. Y. Yeun, and 
K. Taha, “Impact: Impersonation attack detection via edge computing  
using deep autoencoder and feature abstraction,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 
pp. 65520–65529, 2020. 
[95] K. Hofer-Schmitz and B. Stojanovic´, “Towards formal verification of  
iot protocols: A review,” Computer Networks , vol. 174, p. 107233,  
2020. 
[96] H. Si, C. Sun, Y. Li, H. Qiao, and L. Shi, “Iot information sharing se-  
curity mechanism based on blockchain technology,” Future generation 
computer systems, vol. 101, pp. 1028–1040, 2019. 
[97] M. Wazid, P. Reshma Dsouza, A. K. Das, V. Bhat K, N. Kumar, 
and J. J. Rodrigues, “Rad -ei: a routing attack detection scheme for  
edge-based internet of things environment,” International Journal of  
Communication Systems, vol. 32, no. 15, p. e4024, 2019. 
[98] Y. Xu, J. Ren, G. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “A  
blockchain-based nonrepudiation network computing service scheme  
for industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15, 
no. 6, pp. 3632–3641, 2019. 

--- PAGE 16 ---

16 
 
[99] R. Vishwakarma and A. K. Jain, “A survey of ddos attacking techniques 
and defence mechanisms in the iot network,” Telecommunication  
systems, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 3–25, 2020. 
[100] D. Pavithran, K. Shaalan, J. N. Al-Karaki, and A. Gawanmeh, “Towards 
building a blockchain framework for iot,” Cluster Computing, vol. 23, 
no. 3, pp. 2089–2103, 2020. 
[101] J. C. Song, M. A. Demir, J. J. Prevost, and P. Rad, “Blockchain design  
for trusted decentralized iot networks,” in 2018 13th Annual Conference 
on System of Systems Engineering (SoSE), pp. 169–174, IEEE, 2018. 
[102] B. Alotaibi, “Utilizing blockchain to overcome cyber security concerns 
in the internet of things: A review,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 19,  
no. 23, pp. 10953–10971, 2019. 
[103] M. Hamad, A. Finkenzeller, H. Liu, J. Lauinger, V. Prevelakis, and 
S. Steinhorst, “Seemqtt: Secure end -to-end mqtt-based communication 
for mobile iot systems using secret sharing and trust delegation,” IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal, 2022. 
[104] S. Parween and S. Z. Hussain, “A comparative analysis of coap 
based congestion control in iot,” in 2021 4th International Conference  
on Recent Trends in Computer Science and Technology (ICRTCST), 
pp. 321–324, IEEE, 2022. 
[105] M. Lima, R. Lima, F. Lins, and M. Bonfim, “Beholder –a cep -based 
intrusion detection and prevention systems for iot environments,”  
Computers & Security, vol. 120, p. 102824, 2022. 
[106] V. K. Quy, N. V. Hau, D. V. Anh, and L. A. Ngoc, “Smart healthcare 
iot applications based on fog computing: architecture, applications and 
challenges,” Complex & Intelligent Systems , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 3805 – 
3815, 2022. 
[107] I. Martins, J. S. Resende, P. R. Sousa, S. Silva, L. Antunes, and 
J. Gama, “Host -based ids: A review and open issues of an anomaly  
detection system in iot,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 2022. 
[108] C. Wan, A. Mehmood, M. Carsten, G. Epiphaniou, and J. Lloret, “A  
blockchain based forensic system for iot sensors using mqtt protocol,”  
in 2022 9th International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems,  
Management and Security (IOTSMS), pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2022. 
[109] W. Xiang and Z. Yuanyuan, “Scalable access control scheme of internet 
of things based on blockchain,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 198, 
pp. 448–453, 2022. 
[110] T. A. Ahanger, A. Aljumah, and M. Atiquzzaman, “State- of-the-art 
survey of artificial intelligent techniques for iot security,” Computer  
Networks, p. 108771, 2022. 
[111] A. Pandey, R. Vamsi, and S. Kumar, “Handling device heterogeneity  
and orientation using multistage regression for gmm based localization 
in iot networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 144354–144365, 2019. 
[112] A. L. M. Neto, L. Barbosa, ´I. F. S. Cunha, et al., “Authentication of  
things: Authentication and access control for the entire iot device life- 
cycle,” in Anais Estendidos do XXII Simpo´sio Brasileiro em Seguranc¸a 
da Informac¸a˜o e de Sistemas Computacionais, pp. 49–56, SBC, 2022. 
[113] H. Cui, X. Yi, and S. Nepal, “Achieving scalable access control over  
encrypted data for edge computing networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, 
pp. 30049–30059, 2018. 
[114] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, Z. Latif, S. S. Kanhere, and S. P. Mohanty,  
“Interoperability and synchronization management of blockchain-based 
decentralized e -health systems,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering  
Management, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1363–1376, 2020. 
[115] M. Gupta and R. Sandhu, “Towards activity-centric access control 
for smart collaborative ecosystems,” in Proceedings of the 26th ACM  
Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, pp. 155–164, 
2021. 
[116] X. Yao, F. Farha, R. Li, I. Psychoula, L. Chen, and H. Ning, “Security  
and privacy issues of physical objects in the iot: Challenges and  
opportunities,” Digital Communications and Networks, vol. 7, no. 3, 
pp. 373–384, 2021. 
[117] A. Iftekhar, X. Cui, Q. Tao, and C. Zheng, “Hyperledger fabric 
access control system for internet of things layer in blockchain -based 
applications,” Entropy, vol. 23, no. 8, p. 1054, 2021. 
[118] P. Patil, M. Sangeetha, and V. Bhaskar, “Blockchain for iot access  
control, security and privacy: a review,” Wireless Personal Communi - 
cations, vol. 117, no. 3, pp. 1815–1834, 2021. 
[119] Y. Feng, W. Zhang, X. Luo, and B. Zhang, “A consortium blockchain - 
based access control framework with dynamic orderer node selection  
for 5g-enabled industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Infor - 
matics, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2840–2848, 2021. 
[120] L. Tan, N. Shi, K. Yu, M. Aloqaily, and Y. Jararweh, “A blockchain - 
empowered access control framework for smart devices in green  
internet of things,” ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1–20, 2021. 
[121] N. Deepa, Q.-V. Pham, D. C. Nguyen, S. Bhattacharya, B. Prabadevi, 
T. R. Gadekallu, P. K. R. Maddikunta, F. Fang, and P. N. Pathirana, 
“A survey on blockchain for big data: approaches, opportunities, and  
future directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems, 2022. 
[122] H. Xue, D. Chen, N. Zhang, H. -N. Dai, and K. Yu, “Integration of  
blockchain and edge computing in internet of things: A survey,” arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2205.13160, 2022. 
[123] A. R. Javed, M. A. Hassan, F. Shahzad, W. Ahmed, S. Singh, 
T. Baker, and T. R. Gadekallu, “Integration of blockchain technology  
and federated learning in vehicular (iot) networks: A comprehensive  
survey,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 12, p. 4394, 2022. 
[124] Z. Shah, I. Ullah, H. Li, A. Levula, and K. Khurshid, “Blockchain  
based solutions to mitigate distributed denial of service (ddos) attacks  
in the internet of things (iot): A survey,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 1094, 
2022. 
[125] D. Pennino, M. Pizzonia, A. Vitaletti, and M. Zecchini, “Blockchain  
as iot economy enabler: A review of architectural aspects,” Journal of  
Sensor and Actuator Networks, vol. 11, no. 2, p. 20, 2022. 
[126] R. Antwi, J. D. Gadze, E. T. Tchao, A. Sikora, H. Nunoo-Mensah, A. S. 
Agbemenu, K. O.- B. Obour Agyekum, J. O. Agyemang, D. Welte,  
and E. Keelson, “A survey on network optimization techniques for  
blockchain systems,” Algorithms, vol. 15, no. 6, p. 193, 2022. 
[127] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, N. Sahu, V. Venkatesh, A. Goyal, and 
M. Guizani, “A comprehensive survey on the applications of blockchain 
for securing vehicular networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys &  
Tutorials, 2022. 
[128] A. Abdelmaboud, A. I. A. Ahmed, M. Abaker, T. A. E. Eisa, 
H. Albasheer, S. A. Ghorashi, and F. K. Karim, “Blockchain for iot  
applications: Taxonomy, platforms, recent advances, challenges and  
future research directions,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 630, 2022. 
[129] S. Venkatraman and S. Parvin, “Developing an iot identity management 
system using blockchain,” Systems, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 39, 2022. 
[130] K. T. Nguyen, N. Oualha, and M. Laurent, “Securely outsourcing the  
ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption,” World Wide Web, vol. 21, 
no. 1, pp. 169–183, 2018. 
[131] S. Y. A. Zaidi, M. A. Shah, H. A. Khattak, C. Maple, H. T. Rauf, 
A. M. El-Sherbeeny, and M. A. El -Meligy, “An attribute-based access 
control for iot using blockchain and smart contracts,” Sustainability , 
vol. 13, no. 19, p. 10556, 2021. 
[132] E. Barka, S. S. Mathew, and Y. Atif, “Securing the web of things 
with role-based access control,” in Codes, Cryptology, and Information 
Security (S. El Hajji, A. Nitaj, C. Carlet, and E. M. Souidi, eds.),  
(Cham), pp. 14–26, Springer International Publishing, 2015. 
[133] A. Kesarwani and P. M. Khilar, “Development of trust based access  
control models using fuzzy logic in cloud computing,” Journal of King 
Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, vol. 34, no. 5, 
pp. 1958–1967, 2022. 
[134] J. L. Herrera, H.- Y. Chen, J. Berrocal, J. M. Murillo, and C. Julien,  
“Context-aware privacy-preserving access control for mobile comput - 
ing,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 87, p. 101725, 2022. 
[135] B. Annane, A. Alti, L. Laouamer, and H. Reffad, “Cx-cp-abe: Context- 
aware attribute-based access control schema and blockchain technology 
to ensure scalable and efficient health data privacy,” Security and  
Privacy, vol. 5, no. 5, p. e249, 2022. 
[136] W. Zhang, S. Liu, and Z. Xia, “A distributed privacy -preserving data 
aggregation scheme for smart grid with fine -grained access control,” 
Journal of Information Security and Applications , vol. 66, p. 103118,  
2022. 
[137] K. K. Karmakar, V. Varadharajan, P. Speirs, M. Hitchens, and 
A. Robertson, “Sdpm: A secure smart device provisioning and monitor- 
ing service architecture for smart network infrastructure,” IEEE Internet 
of Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 24, pp. 25037–25051, 2022. 
[138] M. Wazid, J. Singh, A. K. Das, S. Shetty, M. K. Khan, and J. J. 
Rodrigues, “Ascp -iomt: Ai -enabled lightweight secure communica - 
tion protocol for internet of medical things,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, 
pp. 57990–58004, 2022. 
[139] H. Liu, D. Han, and D. Li, “Fabric -iot: A blockchain -based access  
control system in iot,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 18207–18218, 2020. 
[140] J. Wang, J. Zhu, M. Zhang, I. Alam, and S. Biswas, “Function  
virtualization can play a great role in blockchain consensus,” IEEE 
Access, vol. 10, pp. 59862–59877, 2022. 
[141] A. A. Selcuk, E. Uzun, and M. R. Pariente, “A reputation-based 
trust management system for p2p networks,” in IEEE International  
Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, 2004. CCGrid 2004., 
pp. 251–258, IEEE, 2004. 

--- PAGE 17 ---

17 
 
[142] H. Tran, M. Hitchens, V. Varadharajan, and P. Watters, “A trust 
based access control framework for p2p file- sharing systems,” in  
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on  
System Sciences, pp. 302c–302c, IEEE, 2005. 
[143] N. Saxena, G. Tsudik, and J. H. Yi, “Admission control in peer -to- 
peer: design and performance evaluation,” in Proceedings of the 1st  
ACM workshop on Security of ad hoc and sensor networks , pp. 104 – 
113, 2003. 
[144] N. Saxena, G. Tsudik, and J. H. Yi, “Identity -based access control for  
ad hoc groups,” in International Conference on Information Security  
and Cryptology, pp. 362–379, Springer, 2004. 
[145] R. Sandhu and X. Zhang, “Peer -to-peer access control architecture  
using trusted computing technology,” in Proceedings of the tenth ACM 
symposium on Access control models and technologies , pp. 147 –158, 
2005. 
[146] P. Fenkam, S. Dustdar, E. Kirda, G. Reif, and H. Gall, “Towards an  
access control system for mobile peer -to-peer collaborative environ - 
ments,” in Proceedings. Eleventh IEEE International Workshops on  
Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 
pp. 95–100, IEEE, 2002. 
[147] N. Fotiou, I. Pittaras, V. A. Siris, S. Voulgaris, and G. C. Polyzos,  
“Secure iot access at scale using blockchains and smart contracts,” in  
2019 IEEE 20th International Symposium on” A World of Wireless,  
Mobile and Multimedia Networks”(WoWMoM), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019. 
[148] A. Z. Ourad, B. Belgacem, and K. Salah, “Using blockchain for 
iot access control and authentication management,” in International  
Conference on Internet of Things, pp. 150–164, Springer, 2018. 
[149] R. Xu, Y. Chen, E. Blasch, and G. Chen, “Blendcac: A blockchain - 
enabled decentralized capability-based access control for iots,” in 2018 
IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and  
IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE  
Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart  
Data (SmartData), pp. 1027–1034, IEEE, 2018. 
[150] J. Lu, R. Li, Z. Lu, and X. Ma, “A role-based access control architecture 
for p2p file -sharing systems using primary/backup strategy,” in 2009 
International Conference on Networks Security, Wireless Communica - 
tions and Trusted Computing, vol. 1, pp. 700–703, IEEE, 2009. 
[151] M. S. Reza, S. Biswas, A. Alghamdi, M. Alrizq, A. K. Bairagi, and 
M. Masud, “Acc: Blockchain based trusted management of academic 
credentials,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Smart Elec - 
tronic Systems (iSES), pp. 438–443, 2021. 
[152] F.-K. Tseng, J. K. Zao, Y.-H. Liu, and F.-P. Kuo, “Halo: A hierarchical 
identity-based public key infrastructure for peer -to-peer opportunistic 
collaboration,” in 2009 Tenth International Conference on Mobile Data 
Management: Systems, Services and Middleware , pp. 672 –679, IEEE, 
2009. 
[153] K. A. Aravind, B. R. Naik, and C. S. Chennarao, “Combined digital sig- 
nature with sha hashing technique-based secure system: An application 
of blockchain using iot,” Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics 
Education (TURCOMAT), vol. 13, no. 03, pp. 402–418, 2022. 
[154] A. Mohsenzadeh, A. J. Bidgoly, and Y. Farjami, “A novel reputation - 
based consensus framework (rcf) in distributed ledger technology,”  
Computer Communications, vol. 190, pp. 126–144, 2022. 
[155] K. Mrazek, B. Holton, C. Cathcart, J. Speirer, J. Do, and T. K. Mohd,  
“Risks in blockchain –a survey about recent attacks with mitigation  
methods and solutions for overall,” in 2022 IEEE International Con - 
ference on Electro Information Technology (eIT), pp. 5–10, IEEE, 2022. 
[156] S. Ramos, F. Pianese, T. Leach, and E. Oliveras, “A great disturbance  
in the crypto: Understanding cryptocurrency returns under attacks,”  
Blockchain: Research and Applications, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 100021, 2021. 
[157] I. Makarov and A. Schoar, “Cryptocurrencies and decentralized finance 
(defi),” tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research, 2022. 
[158] A. Averin and O. Averina, “Review of blockchain technology vulner - 
abilities and blockchain -system attacks,” in 2019 International Multi - 
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Modern Technologies (Far- 
EastCon), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019. 
[159] J. J. Kearney and C. A. Perez- Delgado, “Vulnerability of blockchain  
technologies to quantum attacks,” Array, vol. 10, p. 100065, 2021. 
[160] H. E. Arslanian et al., “The book of crypto,” Springer Books, 2022. 
[161] Y. Zhang, M. Zhao, T. Li, Y. Wang, and T. Liang, “Achieving  
optimal rewards in cryptocurrency stubborn mining with state transition 
analysis,” Information Sciences, 2023. 
[162] M. J. Mihaljevic´, L. Wang, S. Xu, and M. Todorovic´, “An approach  
for blockchain pool mining employing the consensus protocol robust  
against block withholding and selfish mining attacks,” Symmetry, 
vol. 14, no. 8, p. 1711, 2022. 
[163] X. Dong, F. Wu, A. Faree, D. Guo, Y. Shen, and J. Ma, “Selfholding:  
A combined attack model using selfish mining with block withholding 
attack,” Computers & Security, vol. 87, p. 101584, 2019. 
[164] K. Nicolas, Y. Wang, G. C. Giakos, B. Wei, and H. Shen, “Blockchain 
system defensive overview for double-spend and selfish mining attacks: 
A systematic approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 3838–3857, 2020. 
[165] M. Kedziora, P. Kozłowski, M. Szczepanik, and P. Jo´z´wiak, “Analysis 
of blockchain selfish mining attacks,” in International Conference 
on Information Systems Architecture and Technology , pp. 231 –240, 
Springer, 2019. 
[166] Q. Bai, X. Zhou, X. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Wang, and Q. Kong, “A deep dive 
into blockchain selfish mining,” in ICC 2019-2019 IEEE International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2019. 
[167] S. K. Dwivedi, R. Amin, and S. Vollala, “Smart contract and ipfs-based 
trustworthy secure data storage and device authentication scheme in fog 
computing environment,” Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications, 
pp. 1–21, 2022. 
[168] Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, W. Jiang, and S. Tang, “Blockchain-enabled 
data sharing in supply chains: Model, operationalization, and tutorial,”  
Production and Operations Management , vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1965 – 
1985, 2021. 
[169] J. Scharfman, “Decentralized finance (defi) fraud and hacks: Part 2,”  
in The Cryptocurrency and Digital Asset Fraud Casebook, pp. 97–110, 
Springer, 2023. 
[170] N. Kshetri and J. Voas, “Blockchain’s carbon and environmental  
footprints,” Computer, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 89–94, 2022. 
[171] X. Yin, Y. Zhu, and J. Hu, “A comprehensive survey of privacy - 
preserving federated learning: A taxonomy, review, and future direc - 
tions,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1 –36, 
2021. 
[172] K. M. Khan, J. Arshad, and M. M. Khan, “Empirical analysis of  
transaction malleability within blockchain-based e-voting,” Computers 
& Security, vol. 100, p. 102081, 2021. 
[173] R. R. Vokerla, B. Shanmugam, S. Azam, A. Karim, F. De Boer, 
M. Jonkman, and F. Faisal, “An overview of blockchain applications  
and attacks,” in 2019 international conference on vision towards  
emerging trends in communication and networking (ViTECoN) , pp. 1– 
6, IEEE, 2019. 
[174] J. Stempel, “Dunkin’ donuts parent settles new york cyberattack 
lawsuit, is fined,” 2022. 
[175] P. Reedy, “Interpol review of digital evidence 2016-2019,” Forensic 
Science International: Synergy, vol. 2, pp. 489–520, 2020. 
[176] N. Al-Otaiby, A. Alhindi, and H. Kurdi, “Anttrust: An ant-inspired trust 
management system for peer-to-peer networks,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 2, 
p. 533, 2022. 
[177] N. C. Velayudhan, A. Anitha, and M. Madanan, “Sybil attack with rsu  
detection and location privacy in urban vanets: An efficient eporp tech- 
nique,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 122, no. 4, pp. 3573 – 
3601, 2022. 
[178] B. Hammi, Y. M. Idir, S. Zeadally, R. Khatoun, and J. Nebhen, “Is it  
really easy to detect sybil attacks in c- its environments: a position pa - 
per,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 23, 
no. 10, pp. 18273–18287, 2022. 
[179] C. Cimpanu, “A mysterious group has hijacked tor exit nodes to  
perform ssl stripping attacks,” 2020. 
[180] nusenu, “Is “kax17” performing de -anonymization attacks against tor  
users?,” 2021. 
[181] H. Djuitcheu, M. Debes, M. Aumu¨ller, and J. Seitz, “Recent review of 
distributed denial of service attacks in the internet of things,” in 2022 
5th Conference on Cloud and Internet of Things (CIoT) , pp. 32 –39, 
IEEE, 2022. 
[182] T. Sunitha, V. Vijayashanthi, M. Navaneethakrishan, T. Mo - 
hanaprakash, S. Ashwin, T. Harish, and E. A. Stanes, “Key observation 
to prevent ip spoofing in ddos attack on cloud environment,” in Soft 
Computing: Theories and Applications: Proceedings of SoCTA 2022, 
pp. 493–505, Springer, 2023. 
[183] R. Chaganti, B. Bhushan, and V. Ravi, “The role of blockchain in ddos 
attacks mitigation: techniques, open challenges and future directions,”  
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03617, 2022. 
[184] A. Scroxton, “New zealand activates security services as ddos outage  
enters fourth day,” 2020. 
[185] A. Bhardwaj, V. Mangat, and R. Vig, “Hyperband tuned deep neural  
network with well posed stacked sparse autoencoder for detection of  
ddos attacks in cloud,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 181916–181929, 2020. 
[186] S. K. Verma, A. Verma, and A. C. Pandey, “Addressing dao insider  
attacks in ipv6 -based low -power and lossy networks,” in 2022 IEEE 
Region 10 Symposium (TENSYMP), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2022. 

--- PAGE 18 ---

18 
 
[187] J. Xu and Y. Feng, “Reap the harvest on blockchain: A survey of 
yield farming protocols,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service  
Management, 2022. 
[188] J. Chen, X. Xia, D. Lo, J. Grundy, and X. Yang, “Maintenance - 
related concerns for post -deployed ethereum smart contract develop - 
ment: issues, techniques, and future challenges,” Empirical Software 
Engineering, vol. 26, no. 6, p. 117, 2021. 
[189] D. Prashar et al. , “Analysis on blockchain vulnerabilities & attacks on  
wallet,” in 2021 3rd International Conference on Advances in Com - 
puting, Communication Control and Networking (ICAC3N), pp. 1515– 
1521, IEEE, 2021. 
[190] P. Dimitrios, Distributed Consensus Inference and Blockchain . PhD 
thesis, ARISTOTLE UNIVERSITY OF THESSALONIKI, 2022. 
[191] E. Chang, P. Darcy, K.- K. R. Choo, and N. -A. Le -Khac, “Forensic  
artefact discovery and attribution from android cryptocurrency wallet 
applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14611, 2022. 
[192] W. Nam and H. Kil, “Formal verification of blockchain smart contracts 
via atl model checking,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 8151–8162, 2022. 
[193] S. Biswas, K. Sharif, F. Li, S. Maharjan, S. P. Mohanty, and Y. Wang,  
“Pobt: A lightweight consensus algorithm for scalable iot business  
blockchain,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 2343 – 
2355, 2020. 
[194] F. A. Aponte-Novoa, A. L. S. Orozco, R. Villanueva-Polanco, and 
P. Wightman, “The 51% attack on blockchains: A mining behavior  
study,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 140549–140564, 2021. 
[195] P. Tekchandani, I. Pradhan, A. K. Das, N. Kumar, and Y. Park,  
“Blockchain-enabled secure big data analytics for internet of things  
smart applications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 7, 
pp. 6428–6443, 2023. 